554 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012
Particle Swarm Optimization Based Active Noise
Control Algorithm Without Secondary
Path Identiﬁcation
Nirmal Kumar Rout, Debi Prasad Das, Member , IEEE, and Ganapati Panda, Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, particle swarm optimization (PSO)
algorithm, which is a nongradient but simple evolutionary
computing-type algorithm, is proposed for developing an efﬁcient
active noise control (ANC) system. The ANC is conventionally used
to control low-frequency acoustic noise by employing a gradient-
optimization-based ﬁltered-X least mean square (FXLMS) algo-
rithm. Hence, there is a possibility that the performance of the
ANC may be trapped by local minima problem. In addition,
the conventional FXLMS algorithm needs prior identiﬁcation of
the secondary path. The proposed PSO-based ANC algorithm
does not require the estimation of secondary path transfer func-
tion unlike FXLMS algorithm and, hence, is immune to time-
varying nature of the secondary path. In this investigation, a small
modiﬁcation is incorporated in the conventional PSO algorithm
to develop a conditional reinitialized PSO algorithm to suit to
the time-varying plants of the ANC system. Systematic computer
simulation studies are carried out to evaluate the performance of
the new PSO-based ANC algorithm.
Index Terms —Active noise control (ANC), adaptive ﬁltering,
conditional reinitialized PSO (CRPSO), optimization, particle
swarm optimization (PSO).
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE PROBLEMS associated with acoustic noise in indus-
try are increasing day by day, and hence, their control has
been an important topic of the present-day research. The noise
sources may be due to automobiles, engines, compressors, or
electric drives. Excessive noise induces hearing loss, aggravates
health issue, degrades occupational performance, and, above
all, interferes in communication. There are two approaches
to control acoustic noise: passive and active. The traditional
approach to control acoustic noise employs passive techniques,
such as enclosures, barriers, and silencers. These methods
Manuscript received January 26, 2011; revised July 7, 2011; accepted
August 17, 2011. Date of publication October 26, 2011; date of current version
January 5, 2012. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process for this
paper was Dr. John Sheppard.
N. K. Rout is with the School of Electronics Engineering, Kalinga Insti-
tute of Industrial Technology University, Bhubaneswar 751024, India (e-mail:
routnirmal@rediffmail.com).
D. P . Das is with the Process Engineering and Instrumentation Cell, CSIR-
Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Council of Scientiﬁc and
Industrial Research, Bhubaneswar 751013, India (e-mail: debi_das_debi@
yahoo.com; dpdas@immt.res.in).
G. Panda is with the School of Electrical Sciences, Indian Institute of Tech-
nology Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar 751013, India (e-mail: ganapati.panda@
gmail.com; gpanda@iitbbs.ac.in).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIM.2011.2169180
are very costly for achieving high attenuation over a wide
frequency range and also ineffective at low frequencies. Active
noise control (ANC) has been an alternative to this, particularly
for low-frequency noise control. The ANC is an electroacoustic
or electromechanical system which cancels an acoustic noise
based on the principle of destructive interference with another
noise produced by the controller generating the same amplitude
and frequency as that of original noise but opposite in phase. A
schematic diagram of a single-channel ANC system is shown
in Fig. 1(a). In an ANC system, a reference microphone is
used to feed the reference noise signal to the controller of the
ANC system, which is usually an adaptive ﬁlter. The output of
the adaptive ﬁlter is used to generate the antinoise through a
loudspeaker system. An error microphone is used to sense the
residual noise which, in turn, is used to tune the ANC controller.
The acoustical path from the noise source to the point of
noise cancellation is called the primary path, and the path
from the output of the adaptive ﬁlter through the loudspeaker
system and the acoustical path between the loudspeaker and
the error microphone up to the received signal through the
microphone system is named the secondary path. Fig. 1(b)
shows the block diagram of a commonly used ﬁltered-X least
mean square (FXLMS) algorithm-based ANC system [1]. The
FXLMS algorithm uses the ofﬂine estimate of the secondary
path. The reference signal x(n), which acoustically propagates
toward the cancellation point through the primary path [denoted
as P(z) in Fig. 1(b)], transformed to d(n).T h ex(n) is received
by the reference microphone and fed to the ANC ﬁlter W(z).
The output of the ANC algorithm travels through a secondary
path. The secondary path is an electroacoustic path consisting
of a digital-to-analog converter, reconstruction ﬁlter, power
ampliﬁer, loudspeaker, acoustic path between the canceling
loudspeaker and the error microphone, preampliﬁer, antialias-
ing ﬁlter, and analog-to-digital converter [1]. The secondary
path is required to be estimated prior to running the FXLMS-
based ANC algorithm. From the derivation of the FXLMS
algorithm presented in [1], it can be found that the weights of
the ANC ﬁlter W(z) are updated using the error microphone
signal e(n) and a ﬁltered reference signal x′(n). The ﬁltered
reference signal is the reference signal x(n) ﬁltered through
the estimated secondary path ˆS(z). The estimated secondary
path ˆS(z) is a mathematical model (often represented by a
digital ﬁlter) of the actual secondary path S(z) shown in
Fig. 1(a) and (b). The FXLMS algorithm assumes that S(z)
is equal to ˆS(z). Error in the estimate of the secondary path
0018-9456/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE

ROUT et al.: PSO BASED ANC ALGORITHM WITHOUT SECONDARY P ATH IDENTIFICATION 555
Fig. 1. Single-channel ANC system. (a) Schematic diagram. (b) Block diagram using FXLMS algorithm as the ANC algorithm.
leads to degraded performance of the ANC algorithm. Different
variants of FXLMS algorithms have been proposed to cir-
cumvent different issues linked with the ANC. In [2], the
computational issue is addressed, and a fast version of FXLMS
algorithm is proposed. The FXLMS algorithm is modiﬁed
by using nonlinear adaptive ﬁlters in [3], [4] to address the
nonlinear noise processes. All these algorithms employ the
pre-estimated secondary path transfer function and may lead
to divergence of the algorithm due to estimation error. Fur-
thermore, in practical situations, it is often observed that the
secondary path behaves as a time-varying system. In addition
to this, the FXLMS algorithm may also lead to local minima
problem as it uses gradient method to update the coefﬁcient of
the adaptive ﬁlter of the ANC. The genetic algorithms (GAs) [5]
have been used as an alternative learning algorithm to develop
an ANC without the use of secondary path estimation. The GA-
based ANC using IIR ﬁlter [6] and nonlinear V olterra ﬁlters
[7]–[9] is proposed for ANC applications. The authors have
shown that the GA-based approach is superior to the FXLMS
algorithm as the former does not use secondary path estimate
for its adaptation. Recently, particle swarm optimization (PSO)
has been proposed as a useful alternative to GA and has been
applied to many practical problems. The PSO is originally
proposed by Kennedy et al. in [10]–[12] as an optimization
tool. The same is modiﬁed and applied as adaptive ﬁlter algo-
rithms by Krusienski and Jenkins in [13]–[16]. Adaptive noise
canceler based on PSO algorithm is proposed in [17]. A PSO-
based adaptation of the weights of multilayer neural network
as a nonlinear ANC algorithm has been proposed in [18]. The
performance of the PSO-based adaptation in a linear ANC
system is presented in [19] where the algorithm uses the models
of primary path and secondary path to generate the ANC con-
troller. The comprehensive learning PSO, an improved version
of the PSO algorithm, has been proposed recently for a system
identiﬁcation [20].
In this paper, we develop a systematic algorithm for PSO-
based ANC system. The PSO and other evolutionary computa-
tion algorithms are often used as ofﬂine optimization tools as
the ﬁtness value of these algorithms depends on a number of
input samples instead of a single sample. This is because the
average of errors over certain time duration (set of samples)
is a better performance criterion for evolutionary algorithms
compared to a single error that is generated in every sample
of input signal. However, the conventional ANC parameters are
updated on a sample-by-sample basis. In this paper, a scheme
for using the PSO algorithm to run on a sample-by-sample
manner is proposed for the design of ANC. Through simulation
experiments, it is shown that the basic PSO algorithm fails to
adapt properly for time-varying primary and secondary paths.
Therefore, a new scheme is proposed to reinitialize the particle
vectors of the PSO algorithm, when it tends to be trapped in lo-
cal minima situation. The proposed scheme has been shown to
outperform the basic PSO-based algorithm for the ANC while
trying to combat noise with abruptly time-varying primary and
secondary paths.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the
proposed scheme of using the basic PSO-based algorithm for
the ANC system and the new particle reinitialization scheme
for time-varying primary and secondary paths. Section III
presents the results obtained from computer simulations. Fi-
nally, in Section IV, the conclusion of the investigation is
presented.
II. P ROPOSED PSO-B ASED ANC S YSTEM
In the ANC system, the electrical control signal is generated
in a sample-by-sample basis and is converted to acoustic signal
(antinoise) using a loudspeaker system. The control signal is
generated by passing the reference microphone signal through
the ANC system. A linear ANC system consists of a ﬁnite
impulse response (FIR) ﬁlter. The objective of the tuning algo-
rithm in an ANC system is to optimize the FIR ﬁlter coefﬁcients
of the ANC system such that the received signal in the error
microphone is minimized [refer to Fig. 1(a)]. The evolutionary
algorithm like the GA or the PSO cannot be directly used in the
ANC system as the performance of the algorithm depends on
a set of error samples (the error microphone signal samples for
a certain duration of time) and not on the instantaneous value
(single sample value) of the error microphone. In addition, in
the conventional PSO- or GA-based optimization, the same
data set is used to update the particles or the chromosomes,
respectively, in every generation. However, in a practical ANC
system, there is no scope for providing the same set of noise

556 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012
samples to the adaptive algorithm, as noise is generated from a
continuous dynamical system.
A. Proposed Scheme of Online ANC Adaptation
It is often felt that the GA-based [7]–[9] or PSO-based
[18], [19] ANC algorithms are used to detect global minimum
values, without the prior knowledge of the secondary paths,
and they are more robust than traditional algorithms. However,
their real-time adaptability is questionable in a large number of
applications. It is to be noted here that the GA- or PSO-based
algorithm uses P -sets of adaptive ﬁlter as opposed to the one in
the case of the FXLMS algorithm. In real-time algorithm, only
one of the P adaptive ﬁlters should be used at a time. As the
ANC algorithm trains its control parameters using a real noise
source, we do not have control over sending the same noise
source to all the adaptive ﬁlters to ﬁnd out their ﬁtness values.
Therefore, the proposed implementation scheme is dedicated
toward real-time adaptability of the PSO algorithm which relies
on a continuously generating noise source. Like conventional
ANC, the noise source propagates through the primary path
on a real-time basis. The noise so generated is captured by the
reference microphone and is sent to one of the P adaptive ﬁlters
via a demultiplexer (DMUX). The select signal input of the
multiplexer (MUX) and DMUX (in Fig. 2) allows one of the P
adaptive ﬁlters to get the input signal and generate the output,
which is then fed to the loudspeaker system to generate the
antinoise. The noise and antinoise superimpose in the acoustic
environment generating residual noise signal that is captured by
the PSO processor by the error microphone. The select signal
is used to provide equal numbers of noise samples to each
adaptive ﬁlter in each generation. The PSO processor controls
the repeated production of the select signal, acquisition of the
residual noise signal, and the updating of the ﬁlter weights in
every generation.
The original noise generated by the noise source acoustically
traveling through the primary path to the point of cancellation,
denoted here as d(n), acoustically superimposes with the anti-
noise ˆd(n) to produce the residual noise and is captured by
the error microphone as e(n). In this process, a set of error
signal samples is stored in the PSO processor for one adaptive
ﬁlter. The process is repeated by changing the select signal
so that the noise passes through each adaptive ﬁlter one by
one. It is to be noted that the same set of noise samples need
not be sent to other adaptive ﬁlters. Hence, running the noise
source and selecting P adaptive ﬁlters would store P -mean
square errors in the PSO processor. These P -mean square errors
are used to update the weights of the adaptive ﬁlters using
the PSO-based algorithm as presented in the next section. In
a GA- or a PSO-based algorithm, a generation is deﬁned as
a time where the populations carry out genetic or swarming
operations, respectively, to go to the next generation. In here, at
every generation, all the P adaptive ﬁlters are used to generate
antinoise and update themselves using a PSO algorithm. Since
it is an online adaptive algorithm, the weight adaptation process
continues until the ANC is in operation unlike the conventional
GA-based algorithm where there is a stopping criterion at
which the adaptation of weights is suspended but the ANC keep
producing the antinoise with its ﬁxed weights. Advantage of
continuous adaptation is to match the ANC ﬁlter to any change
that occurs in the primary and secondary paths. Hence, there
is no stopping criterion as in the conventional GA and PSO
applications.
B. PSO-Based ANC Algorithm
The objective of the aforementioned scheme of the online
ANC algorithm is to minimize the mean square error that is
sensed by the error microphone. To apply the PSO algorithm to
such an optimization problem, let us consider a coefﬁcient vec-
tor of P adaptive ﬁlters as population which is represented as a
set of particles in the PSO terminology. The PSO algorithm is
an evolutionary computation technique developed by Kennedy
and Eberhart [10], which is inspired by social behavior of
swarms. The PSO is initialized with a population of random
solutions like other evolutionary algorithms. In this case, the
coefﬁcient vectors of the P adaptive ﬁlters are used as the initial
random solutions. Let this set be represented as
W =


w1
1 w2
1 ··· wP
1
w1
2 w2
2 ··· wP
2
... ... ··· ...
w1
N w2
N ··· wP
N

 . (1)
Each column of the W in (1) is a potential initial solution and
is called a particle. Referring to the block diagram in Fig. 2,
each column of W in (1) represents the coefﬁcient vector of
one of the P adaptive ﬁlters. The noise signal received by
the reference microphone is fed to each of these ﬁlters which
produce y1(n),y 2(n),...,y P (n) as output at different time
frames. The P outputs act as the control signal in the ANC,
which pass through the loudspeaker system to generate the
antinoise signal set represented as { ˆd1(n), ˆd2(n),..., ˆdP (n)}.
It is clariﬁed here that the set {y1(n),y 2(n),...,y P (n)} con-
sists of electrical signals whereas { ˆd1(n), ˆd2(n),..., ˆdP (n)}
represents the acoustical signal. A set of residual error signals
{e1(n),e 2(n),...,e P (n)} is received by the error microphone.
These error signal set is a result of the acoustical superposi-
tion of { ˆd1(n), ˆd2(n),..., ˆdP (n)} with the noise signal at the
canceling point, i.e., d(n), at different time intervals. Thus, the
error signals generated are given by
ep(n)= d(n)+ ˆdp(n) (2)
where p =1 ,2,3,...,P ,n denotes the sample index of the
input signal which ranges from 1 to M and M is the total
number of samples used in each generation. The mean square
error of each of these P errors, which represents the ﬁtness of
each particle (adaptive ﬁlter), is stored in the PSO processor.
In the PSO terminologies, the particle is ﬂown through the
problem space with a velocity which is dynamically updated
by using an update equation. The update equation is derived
using the ﬂying experiences of its own and that of the other
members of its generation. The position of the ith particle and
its velocity in the kth iteration (generation) are denoted by
Wi(k) and Vi(k), respectively. The position of the ith particle

ROUT et al.: PSO BASED ANC ALGORITHM WITHOUT SECONDARY P ATH IDENTIFICATION 557
Fig. 2. Block diagram of PSO-based training of an ANC system for scheme-II.
with smallest mean square error in the previous position is
recorded and represented by the symbol pbesti (personal best),
and its position is represented as Wpbesti . The best among all
the particles is represented by the symbol gbest (global best),
and its position is represented as Wgbest . The PSO algorithm
updates the velocity and the position of each particle toward
its Wpbest and Wgbest positions at each step according to the
following update equations:
Vi(k)= Vi(k − 1) + r1[ Wpbesti − Wi(k)]
+ r2[ Wgbest − Wi(k)] (3)
Wi(k)= Wi(k − 1) + Vi(k) (4)
where r1 and r2 are two random numbers that are generated in-
dependently in the range [0, 1]. In [21], the basic PSO algorithm
uses two random vectors for r1 and r2; however, we use r1
and r2 as random numbers instead, due to reduced complexity.
Equation (3) calculates a new velocity for each particle (po-
tential solution) based on its previous velocity Vi(k − 1),t h e
particle’s position at which the best ﬁtness has been achieved
Wpbesti , and the best positions of each particle achieved so
far among the neighbors Wgbest . Equation (4) updates each
particle’s position in the solution hyperspace. This process is
continued on a real-time basis.
C. Modiﬁed PSO-Based ANC Algorithm for Time-V arying
Primary and Secondary Paths
Dynamic environment might be either a slow or an abrupt
change in environment. The PSO algorithm fails to achieve
global optimization when adapting a dynamic environment
and is suitably modiﬁed to cope with the slow change in the
environment by utilizing the experience of the particles of the
old environment in the new situation [21]–[23]. However, dy-
namic environment in ANC system refers to an abrupt change
in the primary and/or secondary paths with respect to time.
They are also referred as time-varying primary and secondary
paths. Primary path can change due to the change in acoustic
environment. The secondary path can change due to the change
in both acoustic and electric components. Since these changes
are abrupt in nature, the PSO algorithms proposed in [21]–
[23] are not suitable. It is shown through simulation study (in
Section III) that the basic PSO-based ANC algorithm mini-
mizes the error for ﬁxed primary- and secondary-path cases.
The performance criterion, i.e., the squared error, is minimized
to its achievable minimum value. If the primary or secondary
path is changed after all the particles stabilize to their optimum
values, they cannot adapt to the change and remain in their
local minima (see the dotted curve in Fig. 6). The reason for
this is the randomness of the particle initialization that gets lost
after it is fully optimized. At optimized stage, all the particles
converge to the same value, and hence, there is a need for a
reinitialization of the particles once this change in primary or
secondary path is detected. It is seen (in Figs. 6 and 9) that
the square error value of the gbest particle gives an indication
of the change in the primary or secondary path. This square
error value E2
gbest shows a sudden change if the primary or
the secondary path is abruptly changed (see the dotted curve in
Fig. 6). The E2
gbest value remains almost constant if it is fully
optimized. The following piece of the conditional algorithm
was inserted with the conventional PSO algorithm to reinitialize
the particles to make them suitable to adapt to any change in
primary or secondary path
If
⏐⏐E2
gbest(n − 1) − E2
gbest(n − 2)
⏐⏐≤ k1
&
⏐⏐E2
gbest(n) − E2
gbest(n − 1)
⏐⏐≥ k2 then
Reinitialize V and W (5)
where k1 <k 2, k1 is a very small quantity close to zero, and k2
can be found by experiment using a trial-and-error method. It
shows that the particle and the velocity vectors are required to

558 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012
be reinitialized (randomized), if the errors in previous genera-
tions are negligible and the errors in the present generation are
signiﬁcantly high.
D. Comparison of PSO- and FXLMS-Based ANC Systems
In the FXLMS algorithm, the ANC ﬁlter coefﬁcients are up-
dated at every sample, whereas in PSO-based algorithm, these
are updated after each generation. Each generation consists of
M × P samples, where P is the population count and M is the
number of samples used for evaluating the performance crite-
rion. Since FXLMS algorithm is a gradient-based algorithm, it
is highly susceptible to initialization of the parameter. A wrong
initialization may lead to local minima. In addition to this,
the FXLMS algorithm employs the pre-estimated secondary
path transfer function to update the ANC ﬁlter coefﬁcients.
The FXLMS fails miserably if the secondary path changes
signiﬁcantly from its estimated value [1]. However, the PSO-
based algorithm, being an evolutionary algorithm, has got less
chance of falling into local minima if it is randomly initialized.
In addition to this, the proposed modiﬁed PSO algorithm has
a high likelihood of achieving global optimization as it in-
corporates the reinitialization of weights at appropriate time.
The high likelihoodness is tested with random trials in the
simulation section. The proposed algorithm does not require the
estimation of secondary path transfer function, and hence, it is
immune to the change in the secondary path.
E. Comparison of PSO- and GA-Based ANC Systems
The works reported in [8] and [9] propose a GA and an adap-
tive GA-based nonlinear ANC system without employing sec-
ondary path estimate. However, no speciﬁc scheme for weight
update, like the one given in this paper, has been outlined. Fur-
thermore, these papers do not consider the time-varying nature
of the primary and the secondary paths. The GA-based ANC
used in those papers uses a binary-coded string for each weight
of the adaptive ﬁlter. The GA also involves slow convergence,
and it requires many operations in a generation as shown later in
the simulation section (Fig. 12). The slow convergence is due
to the fact that, in the GA, the binary-coded ﬁlter coefﬁcients
are kept in a string format and are termed as chromosome. The
chromosomes undergo single-point crossover and mutation,
generation by generation. Due to single-point crossover, many
weight parameters remain untouched, and it takes a lot of
generation to be updated. In contrast, in the proposed PSO-
based ANC system, all ﬁlter coefﬁcients are updated using a
systematic and simple update equations presented in (3) and
(4). Hence, the PSO is expected to achieve faster convergence
compared to its GA counterpart. In addition to this, PSO does
not require any binary coding and decoding which also reduces
computational complexity. However, the scheme presented here
to implement PSO algorithm for ANC system can also be
used to implement other evolutionary computational algorithm-
based ANC systems.
III. S IMULA TION EXPERIMENTS
To evaluate the performance of the proposed PSO-based
ANC algorithm, a number of simulation experiments are con-
ducted. In all these experiments, the transfer functions of
primary path and the secondary path are chosen as P(z)=
z−5 +0 .2z−6 +0 .5z−7 − 0.9z−8 and S(z)= z−1 +1 .5z−2 −
z−3, respectively, unless otherwise stated in the speciﬁc exper-
iment. The primary noise signal is considered to be a uniform
white noise signal with a zero mean.
A. Experiment 1: Effect of Order of ANC Filter
The order of the ANC ﬁlter refers to the length of the FIR
ﬁlter of the ANC. At the outset, the order of the ANC ﬁlter is
not known. Simulation experiments are conducted by varying
the length of the adaptive ﬁlter N from 5 to 40. The PSO-
based ANC ﬁlters are updated by using 20 error sample points.
A population size of P = 200 is considered. The convergence
of the square error of the gbest particle is plotted in Fig. 3. It
is observed that, if the length of the adaptive ﬁlter is increased
beyond N =1 0, the convergence performance degrades. There
could be two reasons for this. First, there is a model mismatch if
the ANC ﬁlter length increases beyond ten. Second, the higher
length of the ANC ﬁlter demands more number of parameters to
be optimized which, in turn, demands a higher population size
P . It is also studied by reducing the length from N =1 0.I f
the length is reduced from N =1 0,t h eE2
gbest converges faster
until N =8 , but the steady-state error stabilizes with higher
values as seen in the zoomed portion in Fig. 3. Therefore, an
ANC with N =1 0 is chosen for the rest of the experiments.
B. Experiment 2: Effect of the Number of Error Sample Points
Required for Evaluating the Cost Function
The cost function or the ﬁtness function that represents the
performance criteria is very important in every evolutionary
computing algorithm. In this algorithm, the average of the
square error value over a number of sample points is chosen
as the cost function. The number of sample point is a vari-
able which can be set depending on the performance. Higher
number of sample points to ﬁnd the average would give better
performance over the lower number of sample values. However,
a higher number would pose higher computational complexity.
To ﬁnd the optimum value of such a number, a series of experi-
ments is conducted by varying M from 10 to 60. The population
size P = 200 and the ANC order N =1 0 are chosen in all the
simulation runs. The convergence plots are shown in Fig. 4. It
is seen that the convergence with M =2 0 onward is almost
identical with respect to convergence speed and the steady-state
error. However, for M =1 0, the convergence speed and the
steady-state error performance are degraded. Therefore, in the
rest of the experiments, M is set as equal to 20. It is also felt
that the number of sample points should be at least double of
the ﬁlter length.

ROUT et al.: PSO BASED ANC ALGORITHM WITHOUT SECONDARY P ATH IDENTIFICATION 559
Fig. 3. Convergence characteristic of online PSO-based ANC for different ANC orders N . P = 200 and M =2 0.
Fig. 4. Convergence characteristic of online PSO-based ANC for different M ’s withP = 200 and N =1 0.
C. Experiment 3: Effect of the Population Size
To study the effect of population size on the optimization of
the ANC controller, the length of the ANC adaptive ﬁlter is
ﬁxed at N =1 0. Twenty sample points are used to evaluate the
performance criteria. The algorithm is run for 100 generations,
and the E2
gbest for each generation is plotted to see the conver-
gence characteristic for different population sizes. Population
size is referred here as the number of particles present in the
population and represented as P .T h e P is varied from 10 to
200. It is found from Fig. 5 that the increase in population size
guarantees faster convergence and a lower steady-state value of
E2
gbest . It is found that, for this ANC setup, P = 200 is ideal,
and hence, for the rest of the experiments, this value is ﬁxed.
D. Experiment 4: Time-V arying Primary Path
The conventional basic PSO algorithm is tested for a time-
varying primary path. In a practical application, if the ANC
is in operation inside a room or a vehicle cabin and the door
Fig. 5. Effect of population size for M =2 0 and N =1 0.
is suddenly opened or closed, the acoustic environment is
changed. This leads to an abrupt change in the primary and/or
the secondary path. In this experiment, such an abrupt change

560 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012
Fig. 6. PSO performance with time-varying primary path: In the reinitialized
PSO, the W and V are reset to random values knowingly at generation count
200.
in the primary path is chosen. The primary path is chosen
as P(z)= z−5 +0 .2z−6 +0 .5z−7 − 0.9z−8 up to 200 gener-
ations, and after that, the primary path is abruptly changed to
P(z)= z−5 +0 .2z−6 − 0.5z−7 − 0.9z−8. The secondary path
remains constant throughout this experiment. The population
size P = 200, order of ANC N =1 0, and the number of
sample points used in each generation M =2 0 are set for this
experiment. Fig. 6 shows the convergence plot, which clearly
depicts that the conventional PSO-based ANC is not able to
converge to its global minima after 200th generation. It can
be seen that, since all the particles in the PSO are stabilized
by adapting to particular primary- and secondary-path cases, it
needs a randomization or reinitialization of the particles in the
population set to cope with this dynamic environment. To test
this, all the particles are reinitialized at generation count 200
when the primary path is changed. It is found in Fig. 6 that the
reinitialized PSO is capable of converging to its global optimum
value.
To automatically identify such abrupt change in primary
or secondary paths and reinitialize the velocity and the po-
sition vector of each particle in the population, the modi-
ﬁed PSO algorithm proposed in this paper was used. Fig. 7
shows the performance of the proposed conditional reinitial-
ized PSO (CRPSO) algorithm compared to the conventional
PSO algorithm. To further evaluate the convergence perfor-
mance of the CRPSO algorithm, the primary path transfer
function is changed at generation count 200 and again made
it back to the original transfer function at generation count
300. The convergence characteristic shown in Fig. 8 shows the
effectiveness of the CRPSO algorithm over the conventional
PSO algorithm.
E. Experiment 5: Time-V arying Secondary Path
Similar to the study of the time-varying primary path, the
time-varying secondary path is studied independently in this
experiment. In this experiment, the secondary path is chosen as
S(z)= z−1 +1 .5z−2 − z−3 up to 200 generations, and after
that, the same is abruptly changed to S(z)= z−1 +0 .5z−2.
The primary path remains intact throughout this experiment
Fig. 7. Performance of CRPSO with time-varying primary path: Primary path
changes at generation count 200.
Fig. 8. Performance of the proposed CRPSO with time-varying primary path:
The primary path is changed at generation count 200 and returned to original at
generation count 300.
as P(z)= z−5 +0 .2z−6 +0 .5z−7 − 0.9z−8. The PSO param-
eters were ﬁxed as used in Experiment 4. The convergence
characteristic of the E2
gbest with respect to the generation is
plotted in Fig. 9. The proposed CRPSO is shown to outperform
the conventional PSO in terms of achieving global minima
even after the abrupt change in the secondary path. At this
point, it may be noted that the FXLMS would have failed even
miserably if the secondary path and its estimates are differ-
ent which happens in the case of the time-varying secondary
path [1].
F . Experiment 6: Performance Guarantee of the CRPSO
Algorithm Under Time-V arying Primary and Secondary Paths
It is well known that the performance of the PSO-based
algorithms, namely, conventional and the proposed CRPSO,
depends on the particle initialization. Since the particles are
randomly initialized, they show different performances at dif-
ferent run times. To evaluate the performance guarantee of the
proposed CRPSO with respect to the conventional PSO-based
ANC algorithms with a time-varying primary path as used in
Experiment 4, E2
gbest of ten independent runs is plotted in
Fig. 10 with the same random input signal using the random
seed equal to “zero.” The conventional PSO did not achieve the

ROUT et al.: PSO BASED ANC ALGORITHM WITHOUT SECONDARY P ATH IDENTIFICATION 561
Fig. 9. Performance of CRPSO with time-varying secondary path.
Fig. 10. Performance of CRPSO with time-varying primary path for ten
independent runs with random seed equal to zero.
global minimum in most of the cases after the abrupt change in
the primary path at generation count 200, whereas the proposed
CRPSO achieves the global minimum steady-state square error
for every case.
Similarly, the secondary path is abruptly varied as in Experi-
ment 5, and E2
gbest for ten independent runs is plotted in Fig. 11.
This experiment also conﬁrms the convergence performance of
the CRPSO to achieve the minimum steady-state square error
under abrupt change in the secondary path.
G. Experiment 7: Comparison of the GA- and the
CRPSO-Based ANC Algorithms
Since the GA and PSO are the same class of algorithms
applied to the ANC application, comparison of the convergence
performance and the optimum weight vector obtained in both
these algorithms is conducted. The type of GA used in [8] was
chosen for comparison. The population size of GA was chosen
as either 600 or 100; however, the population size of the PSO
was chosen as 100. The GA used 8-b binary conversion as
used in [8]. The ANC ﬁlter uses ten coefﬁcients in both GA
and PSO algorithms. The convergence of the square error of
the best chromosome in each generation of the GA is plotted
with the square error of the gbest of the CRPSO algorithm
Fig. 11. Performance of CRPSO with time-varying secondary path for ten
independent runs with random seed equal to zero.
Fig. 12. Comparison of convergence performances of the GA- and CRPSO-
based ANC algorithms.
Fig. 13. Comparison of optimized weight vectors of ANC ﬁlter using the
FXLMS, GA-based, and CRPSO-based ANC algorithms.
for comparison in Fig. 12. From Fig. 12, it can be conﬁrmed
that the PSO converges faster than the GA. The GA with a
population size of 600 [8] converges faster than the GA with a

562 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012
population size of 100. Higher population size incurs additional
computational load. To further compare the performances of
the GA and the PSO algorithms (with a population size of
100), the optimum weight vector of the ANC adaptive ﬁlter
(obtained after 200 generations) is plotted with respect to the
weight vector obtained using FXLMS algorithm (with exact
estimation of secondary path) in Fig. 13. It can be seen in
Fig. 13 that the PSO-optimized ANC ﬁlter coefﬁcients exactly
match with the weights obtained in FXLMS algorithm, but the
weights obtained with the GA-based optimization do not match.
It may be noted here that the FXLMS algorithm when using
the exact estimated secondary path can converge to a minimum
solution, and hence, comparison of the proposed algorithm is
made with this. However, if there is a secondary path estimation
error, the FXLMS shows very poor performance [1], but the
proposed algorithm converges to the minimum without the use
of secondary path estimate.
IV . CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a new online ANC algorithm using
PSO-based training. The conventional PSO-based algorithm is
shown to be ineffective to regain convergence in the case of
occurrence of an abrupt change in primary and/or secondary
paths. To cope with the abrupt change in the primary and the
secondary paths, the conventional PSO algorithm is modiﬁed
to introduce a new CRPSO algorithm. A number of computer
simulation experiments are carried out to show the usefulness of
the proposed new PSO algorithm. Analytical discussion is made
for the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm over the FXLMS
and GA-based ANC algorithms. The proposed algorithm does
not use secondary path identiﬁcation and, hence, is immune
to the change in secondary path. The algorithm is also simple
to implement unlike binary-coded GA-algorithm-based ANC.
A new online implementation scheme of the PSO-based ANC
algorithm is proposed in this paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for
their constructive comments which have improved the quality
of this paper.
REFERENCES
[ 1 ] S .M .K u oa n dD .R .M o r g a n ,Active Noise Control Systems—Algorithms
and DSP Implementations. New Y ork: Wiley, 1996.
[2] S. C. Douglas, “Fast implementations of the ﬁltered-X LMS and LMS
algorithms for multichannel active noise control,” IEEE Trans. Speech
Audio Process., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 454–465, Jul. 1999.
[3] D. P . Das and G. Panda, “Active mitigation of nonlinear noise processes
using a novel ﬁltered-s LMS algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Speech Audio
Process., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 313–322, May 2004.
[4] D. P . Das, S. Mahopatra, A. Routray, and T. K. Basu, “Filtered-s LMS
algorithm for multichannel active control of nonlinear noise processes,”
IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1875–1880,
Sep. 2006.
[5] K. S. Tang, K. F. Man, S. Kwong, and Q. He, “Genetic algorithms and
their applications,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 22–37,
Nov. 1996.
[6] K. H. Yim, J. B. Kim, T. P . Lee, and D. S. Ahn, “Genetic adaptive IIR
ﬁltering algorithm for active noise control,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy
Syst., Aug. 22–25, 1999, pp. 1723–1728.
[7] F. Russo and G. L. Sicuranza, “Genetic optimization in nonlinear systems
for active noise control: Accuracy and performance evaluation,” in Proc.
IEEE IMTC, Sorrento, Italy, Apr. 24–27, 2006, pp. 1512–1517.
[8] F. Russo and G. L. Sicuranza, “Accuracy and performance evaluation in
the genetic optimization of nonlinear systems for active noise control,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1443–1450, Aug. 2007.
[9] C. Y . Chang and D. R. Chen, “Active noise cancellation without secondary
path identiﬁcation by using an adaptive genetic algorithm,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2315–2327, Sep. 2010.
[10] J. Kennedy and R. C. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Neural Netw., 1995, pp. 1942–1948.
[11] J. Kennedy and R. Mendes, “Population structure and particle swarm
performance,” in Proc. IEEE Congr . Evol. Comput., Honolulu, HI, 2002,
pp. 1671–1676.
[12] M. Clerc and J. Kennedy, “The particle swarm-explosion, stability and
convergence in a multidimensional complex space,” IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comput., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 58–73, Feb. 2002.
[13] D. J. Krusienski and W. K. Jenkins, “Particle swarm optimization for
adaptive IIR ﬁlter structures,” in Proc. Congr . Evol. Comput., 2004, vol. 1,
pp. 965–970.
[14] D. J. Krusienski and W. K. Jenkins, “Adaptive ﬁltering via particle swarm
optimization,” in Conf. Rec. 37th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput. ,
2003, vol. 1, pp. 571–575.
[15] D. J. Krusienski and W. K. Jenkins, “A modiﬁed particle swarm optimiza-
tion algorithm for adaptive ﬁltering,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits
Syst., 2006, pp. 137–140.
[16] D. J. Krusienski and W. K. Jenkins, “A particle swarm optimization-
least mean squares algorithm for adaptive ﬁltering,” in Conf. Rec. 38th
Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput. , 2004, vol. 1, pp. 241–245.
[17] L. Xia, G. Hui, and L. Jinfeng, “Adaptive noise canceller based on PSO
algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Logist., 2008, pp. 1759–1762.
[18] H. Modares, A. Ahmadyfard, and M. Hadadzarif, “A PSO approach for
non-linear active noise cancellation,” in Proc. 6th WSEAS Int. Conf.
Simul., Modelling Optim., Lisbon, Portugal, 2006, pp. 492–497.
[19] N. K. Rout, D. P . Das, and G. Panda, “Performance evaluation of particle
swarm optimization based active noise control algorithm,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. SEMCCO, Dec. 2010, vol. 6466, pp. 531–536.
[20] B. Majhi and G. Panda, “Identiﬁcation of IIR systems using comprehen-
sive learning particle swarm optimization,” Int. J. Power Energy Convers.,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 105–124, 2009.
[21] L. Liu, S. Y ang, and D. Wang, “Particle swarm optimization with compos-
ite particles in dynamic environments,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern.
B, Cybern., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1634–1648, Dec. 2010.
[22] T. Blackwell and J. Branke, “Multiswarms, exclusion, and anti-
convergence in dynamic environments,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. ,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 459–472, Aug. 2006.
[23] S. Y ang and C. Li, “A clustering particle swarm optimizer for locating and
tracking multiple optima in dynamic environments,” IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comput., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 959–974, Dec. 2010.
Nirmal Kumar Rout received the B.E. degree in
electronics and telecommunication engineering from
the University College of Engineering (presently
known as V eer Surendra Sai University of Technol-
ogy), Sambalpur University, Burla, India, in 1991
and the M.Tech. degree in computer science from
the Utkal University, Bhubaneshwar, India, in 2001.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at
the Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology (KIIT)
University, Bhubaneshwar.
From 1993 to 2002, he was a Lecturer with the De-
partment of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Orissa Engineering
College, Bhubaneswar. He also served as a Faculty Member of the Institute of
Chartered Financial Analysts of India (ICFAI) Institute of Science Technology
(ICFAITech), Hyderabad, India, from 2002 to 2007. He is currently an Asso-
ciate Professor with the School of Electronics Engineering, KIIT University. He
has published four research papers in various refereed international conferences
and Indian journals. His current research interests include active noise control,
adaptive signal processing, soft computing, and evolutionary computing.

ROUT et al.: PSO BASED ANC ALGORITHM WITHOUT SECONDARY P ATH IDENTIFICATION 563
Debi Prasad Das (M’10) received the B.Sc.
(Hons.) degree in physics from Utkal University,
Bhubaneswar, India, in 1996, the M.Sc. degree in
electronics from Sambalpur University, Burla, India,
in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree in electronics and
instrumentation engineering from the National Insti-
tute of Technology, Rourkela, India, in 2004.
From 2003 to 2004, he was an Assistant Profes-
sor and the Head of the Department of Electronics,
Silicon Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar. From
2004 to 2005, he was a Postdoctoral Research As-
sociate with the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India.
From April 2005 to May 2008, he was a Scientist with the Central Electronics
Engineering Research Institute, Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research
(CSIR), Pilani, India. Since May 2008, he has been a Scientist with the
Process Engineering and Instrumentation Cell, CSIR-Institute of Minerals
and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar. During 2010–2011, he visited the
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, for postdoctoral research in the
area of active noise control. His current research interests include active noise
control, adaptive signal processing, computationally efﬁcient and hardware-
suitable algorithms, microcontroller-based system development, and image
processing for the mineral industry.
Dr. Das was a recipient of the Orissa Y oung Scientists Award in 2004 by the
Government of Orissa, India; CSIR Y oung Scientist Award in 2009 by CSIR,
India; and Better Opportunities for Y oung Scientists in Chosen Areas of Science
and Technology Fellowship from 2009 to 2010 by Department of Science and
Technology, Government of India.
Ganapati Panda (M’94–SM’97) received the B.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering and the M.Sc. Eng.
degree in communication systems from Sambalpur
University, Burla, India, in 1971 and 1977, respec-
tively, and the Ph.D. degree in electronics and com-
munication engineering from the Indian Institute
of Technology (IIT) Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India,
in 1981.
From 1984 to 1986, he was a Postdoctoral
Researcher with The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, U.K. He was the Founder Head of the
School of Electrical Sciences, IIT Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, India, as well as
the Founder Head of the Electronics and Communication Engineering Depart-
ment, National Institute of Technology (NIT), Rourkela, India. He also acted
as a Coordinator for World Bank Project with NIT, Rourkela. He has served
38 years in teaching and research in leading technical institutions of India.
He also served as the Director of the NIT, Jamshedpur, India. He is currently
a Deputy Director and Professor with the School of Electrical Sciences, IIT
Bhubaneswar. Prior to this, he was the Dean (Academic Affairs) with IIT
Bhubaneswar and the Dean (Administration) with the NIT, Rourkela. He has
already guided 21 Ph.D. students in the ﬁeld of signal processing, communica-
tion, and soft computing and has published more than 300 research papers in
various refereed international and Indian journals and conferences. Most of his
research papers are extensively cited. He has successfully completed a number
of research projects from All India Council for Technical Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development, Indian Space Research Organization, Defence
Research and Development Organization, Department of Science and Technol-
ogy, and British Council, U.K. He has also edited two books in the area of DSP .
His research interests are digital signal processing, digital communication, soft
computing, intelligent instrumentation, evolutionary computing, computational
ﬁnance, sensor networks, and distributed signal processing.
Prof. Panda is a Fellow of the National Academy of Engineering, India, in
2000, and a Fellow of The National Academy of Sciences, India, in 2003, for his
signiﬁcant research contribution to signal processing and telecommunication.
He is a Fellow of the Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engi-
neers, Fellow of the Institution of Engineers, life member of Computer Society
of India, life member of Indian Society for Technical Education, and life mem-
ber of System Society. He is a regular Reviewer of many international journals
including IEEE, Institution of Engineering and Technology, and Elsevier. He
has chaired and delivered keynote addresses in many international conferences
in India and abroad. He was a recipient of the Samanta Chandra Sekhar Award
in 1993 from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of
Orissa, for his high-quality research work in the ﬁeld of engineering.