Bone Conducted Signal Guided Speech
Enhancement For V oice Assistant on Earbuds
Jens Heitkaemper, Joe Caroselli, Max McKinnon, Arun Narayanan, Nathan Howard
Google LLC, U.S.A
heitkaemper@google.com
Abstract—In this work we present a multi-modal, streaming
enhancement network to improve speech recognition for voice
assistants on earbuds. The proposed model is guided by a bone
conducted signal (BCS) to separate the interfering sources from
the target speaker signal. We train the model on a simulated
speech enhancement training set with a simulated BCS and
ﬁnetune it on a small earbuds speciﬁc training set, consisting
of about 6 hours of speech. To account for distorted BCS the
enhancement module is complemented by a voice activity-based
decision to discard the enhanced output for BCS without speech
information. A possibility to preprocess the BCS to account for
the low-pass characteristic of the bone conduction is evaluated to
lower the required transmission bandwidth from the earbuds to
the recognition device. The results show that the BCS bandwidth
can be reduced to 500 Hz with only small losses in word error
rate. In comparison with a larger state-of-the-art multi-channel
enhancement method, the systems, with and without bandwidth
reduction, demonstrate superior performance on most of the
considered realistic test sets.
Index Terms—Speech enhancement, Bone conducted speech
I. I NTRODUCTION
V oice commands on earbuds is an increasingly common in-
teraction with digital assistants. This development is supported
by the improved performance of today’s automatic speech
recognition (ASR) systems. However, recognition performance
still suffers in low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) environments
and in scenarios with overlapping speech. Reducing the impact
of both environmental noise and overlapping speech on the
ASR performance has been a focus of research in recent years.
One distinction between the approaches currently focused
on by research is whether auxiliary information is used for
enhancement. In other words, whether the systems perform
enhancement only using the input microphone signal [1] or
whether the approach utilizes additional information that is not
presented to the ASR system. Examples for such information
are speaker embeddings [2], enrollment utterances [3], noise
information [4] or multi-channel input [5] or, in the case of
earbuds, the bone conducted signal (BCS) [6].
On enhancement method speciﬁc for buds uses BCSs
recorded by an accelerometer for speech enhancement [7],
[8], [9], [10]. The BCS directly captures the target speech
by recording the speaker’s skull vibration caused by the vocal
chord activity. Therefore, the signal is less affected by inter-
fering environmental sounds [11]. In [12] and [13] the target
speech is regenerated from the BCS by artiﬁcial bandwidth
extension. However, most research focuses on combining BCS
with an air conducted signal (ACS) recorded at the outer mics
of the earbuds [7], [8], [9], [11], [14]. A majority of the
research mentioned above focuses on on-device enhancement
[8], [11]. However, the considered use-case of a voice assistant
should be device independent. Therefore, this work assumes
that the enhancement is performed on a connected device,
e.g., a phone. Running the algorithm on a separate device
increases the possibility for more computationally complex
models at the cost of potentially reducing the number of
available signals, since each additional signal sent from the
earbuds increases the required transmission bandwidth.
In this work a multi-modal enhancement system guided
by the BCS and optimized to improve ASR performance for
voice assistants is presented. Different from [15] we propose a
modular approach enhancing the ACS prior to the ASR model.
[9] and [16] propose time domain multi-modal enhancement
networks for earbuds. However, [17] has shown the beneﬁt of
frequency domain enhancement models. Therefore, we focus
on a short-time Fourier transform (STFT) domain model with
an architecture similar to [18] for mask estimation. In contrast
to [8], [14], [16] we propose to use different input pipelines for
the BCS and ACS by adding a preprocessing step limiting the
BCS frequency range, thereby utilizing the low-pass charac-
teristic of the bone conduction. While this preprocessing step
substantially reduces the required transmission bandwidth, it
only slightly increases the word error rate (WER).
Previous research assumes mostly clean BCSs [8], [11].
However, in realistic scenarios, especially under windy con-
ditions, the BCS can be uninformative. Therefore, this work
combines the enhancement network with a neural network
(NN)-based voice activity detection (V AD) system on the BCS
to ensure that the enhancement is only applied for informative
BCSs. Realistic recordings, performed for this work, show
that roughly 30 % of earbuds data includes uninformative
BCSs, emphasizing the need for a solution. The proposed
model is evaluated on earbuds data, recorded in different noise
scenarios. An ablation study is performed to emphasize the
beneﬁts of some of the design decisions. Additionally, the
model is shown to outperform a state-of-the-art multi-channel
enhancement model [18], ﬁnetuned for the earbuds task.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
introduces the proposed enhancement network and Section III
discusses solutions to deal with distorted BCSs. In Section IV
both the training and evaluation data sets are described. The
evaluation results are presented in Section V. Finally, the paper
concludes in Section VI with a short summary and discussion.
ICASSP 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) | 979-8-3503-6874-1/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP49660.2025.10889416
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 02:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

STFT
STFT
Mask
Estimator
 ISTFT
yt
bt
Y𝓁,f
B𝓁,f
ˆM𝓁,f
 ˆxt
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the proposed BCS guided speech enhancement
system. The green blocks do not include trainable parameters, the blue blocks
are pretrained on simulated data and then ﬁne-tuned on real earbuds data and
the red block is only trained on real earbuds data.
II. BCS-G UIDED ENHANCER
Many earbud devices record signals with multiple micro-
phones while only one channel is sent to the ASR system in
most applications. Therefore, we focus on the single chan-
nel use-case where the frequency representation Y𝓁,f of the
recorded signal yt (t as the sample index) at time frame 𝓁
and frequency bin f is represented by (using the convolutive
transfer function approximation [19]):
Y𝓁,f =H𝓁,f∗S𝓁,f +N𝓁,f =X𝓁,f +N𝓁,f, (1)
where S𝓁,f and N𝓁,f represent the STFT coefﬁcients of the
clean target speech signal and the noise signal.H𝓁,f is a vector
of STFT coefﬁcients of the transfer function from the target
speaker to the microphone and ∗ is the convolution operator.
The STFT coefﬁcients B𝓁,f of the BCS signal bt recorded
by an accelerometer can be represented as:
B𝓁,f =G𝓁,f∗S𝓁,f +GN
𝓁,f∗N𝓁,f +U𝓁,f, (2)
with G𝓁,f as the bone conduction transfer function, GN
𝓁,f as
the noise leakage function of the bone conduction channel, and
U𝓁,f as the microphone noise. Note, that in many applications
GN
𝓁,f∗N𝓁,f and U𝓁,f are assumed to be negligible [20]. G𝓁,f
exhibits a low pass characteristic suppressing most of the target
speech for higher frequencies [11].
The proposed BCS guided enhancement system displayed in
Fig. 1 consists of three types of building blocks. Those without
trainable parameters (green), those pretrained on simulated
data and ﬁnetuned on real earbuds recordings (blue) and those
only trained during ﬁnetuning (red). The non-trainable blocks
consists of a downsampling block, with an anti-aliasing ﬁlter,
which reduces the sampling rate to 2·f BCS
max . This block prevents
the model from using frequency bins that do not include
speech information due to the low pass characteristic of G𝓁,f .
The band-limited signal is upscaled to the original number
of frequency bins by a simple feed forward (FF) projection
layer. Preliminary experiments have shown that training this
upscaling layer without pretraining leads to improved results.
Finally, the upscaled BCS and the ACS are concatenated
and fed to a conformer layer. This combination of BCS and
ACS is similar to the early-fusion described in [8]. This type
of fusion was chosen, since it achieved competitive results in
[8] and allows for streaming processing. Finally, a FF with
BCS-guided
enhancer
ASR
V AD
yt
bt
ˆxt
Fig. 2. Blockdiagram of the full system, in which only the orange block is
trained using the described methodology. The yellow blocks are pre-trained
independently and not adapted in this work.
Sigmoid activation processes the conformer output to estimate
a mask which is applied to the ACS.
During pretraining and ﬁnetuning the model is trained using
the ASR-loss described in [21] and the scale invariant (SI)-
SNR loss [22]. To equalize the scale of the two losses the
ASR-loss is scaled with a weight λASR.
III. D ISTORTED BONE CONDUCTED SIGNALS
As stated above, prior research in speech enhancement on
BCSs assumes that the bone conduction leads to a clean speech
signal with low-pass characteristic [11]. Some of the published
BCS databases even take care to prevent or remove examples
with distorted BCSs [15], [23]. However, in realistic scenarios
those distortions exist and may mask the speech information,
which can lead enhancement systems trained only on clean
BCSs to further degrade the ACS. In those cases using the
enhancement system may lead to a higher error rate compared
to directly transcribing the ACS. We found that roughly 30 %
of our recorded earbuds data included uninformative BCSs.
Here, uninformative means that the BCS does not contain
discernible speech patterns, despite speech activity in the ACS.
There are multiple solutions to deal with distorted BCSs.
One is to add noise to the BCS during training of the enhance-
ment system. However, this may lead to worse performance
on clean BCSs and does not help if the BCS does not contain
speech information. Therefore, this work focuses on detecting
those uninformative BCSs and only applying the enhancer for
informative BCSs. We propose to apply a pretrained V AD
system, designed to detect speech in an ACS, on the BCS
to detect uninformative BCSs. This solution has the beneﬁt
of being independent of earbuds speciﬁc training data and
allowing streaming processing. Preliminary experiments show
that the V AD results are highly correlated with our subjective
assessment of speech presence in the BCS signal.
The ﬁnal system consisting of the enhancer, the V AD and
the ASR system is displayed in Fig. 2. In case of voice
assistant queries the uninformative BCS detection can be
applied to the keyword BCS to reduce potential latency.
IV. D ATABASE
The following section describes the training data for the
enhancement system and the evaluation data. All data in this
work is sampled at 16 kHz. Both the V AD and ASR block in
Fig. 2 are used without retraining on earbuds speciﬁc data and
are therefore not addressed in the training data discussion.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 02:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

A. Training
1) Pretraining set: To pretrain the model, approximately
50k hours of speech from Librispeech [24], Librivox [25],
and internal vendor-collected utterances were used. Librivox
was segmented to create 18M utterances with length from
3 to 15 seconds. These were combined with the 281k Lib-
rispeech utterances and 1.9M from the vendor-collected set.
Reverberation and noise were added to these utterances using
a room simulator [26] to model a single channel ACS. Noise
was applied from internally collected sets from conditions
including cars, cafes, and kitchens as well as from the freely
available noise sources Getty [27] and YouTube Audio Library
[28]. In addition, randomly selected speech from the training
sets was selected to emulate multi-talker conditions. The
applied SNR ranges from -10 to 30 dB while reverberation
T60 times from 0 to 900 ms are used.
The BCS is generated by passing the reverberant speech
(without added noise) through a low-pass ﬁlter. The low-pass
ﬁlter is a ﬁnite-impulse response ﬁlter designed using the
window method with 47 coefﬁcients and a corner frequency
of 500 Hz. The low-pass signal is attenuated between 7 and
13 dB to generate the simulated BCS. Values for the ﬁlter
parameters and attenuation were empirically selected.
2) Finetuning set: The ﬁnetuning set consists of internally
made earbuds recordings in clean scenarios. These recordings
are corrupted by adding realistic noise, e.g. wind noise, that
has been recorded with earbuds. Note that no noise is added
to the BCS since the model is only applied for clean BCSs, as
discussed above. The set consists of 5 k utterances recorded
by 45 speakers. The average utterance length is around 4 s
to match the short commands expected by a voice assistant,
leading to an approximate total of 6 hours of audio.
B. Evaluation
Evaluation is performed on more than 5 hours of inter-
nally recorded real earbuds speech, simulating voice assistant
queries. It includes audio from more than 30 speakers with
roughly 70 % male and 30 % female speakers. The data
includes both native and non-native English speakers, aged
between 20 and 50 years.
To create realistic scenarios different environmental noises
are played at sound pressure levels between 30 and 80 dBA
during the recordings. Environmental noise includes indoor
recordings from a cafe, a bar with music, a marketplace, and
a train station, all with background chatter. Two additional
environmental dimensions may be added in: wind and non-user
non-stationary speech. Since earbud recordings may include
distortions due to windy weather, wind at 0- 6 m/s measured
at the earbud is generated by a wind machine as an additional
challenge during some of the recordings. As another challenge
some recordings include a person walking around the earbud
wearer while talking, pretending to have a phone call, to
simulate overlapping speech.
The recorded evaluation data was split into four non-
overlapping subsets. One with and three sets without the
interfering speaker. An overview of the data sets is displayed
TABLE I
OVERVIEW OVER THE EARBUDS TEST SETS USED TO EVALUATE THE
ENHANCEMENT MODELS .
Dataset Duration Noise SPL Wind speed Multi talkerin hours in dBA in m/s
Easy 0.94   
Moderate 2.10 30-50 0-3 
Hard 1.40 30-80 0-6 
Dynamic 0.74 30-80 0-6 
in Table I. Note, that examples are added to the hard set if
either their sound pressure level (SPL) is at or above 70 dBA
or the wind speed is at or above 6 m/s. Therefore, the hard
set may include examples without wind if the SPL of the
environmental noise is above this threshold.
V. E VALUATION
In this section, the proposed system is evaluated on the
data described in Section IV-B. Since the model is speciﬁ-
cally designed to improve voice assistants, the model and its
components are evaluated in terms of WER. The V AD system
presented in [29] and the ASR model described in [30] are
chosen for this work. To quantify the inference speed the real
time factor (RTF) is reported for all models. Here, the RTF is
deﬁned as the number of seconds required to process a signal
divided by the duration of that signal. The RTF is calculated on
a single core of a CPU, Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU @ 2.20 GHz.
All BCS guided networks are pretrained for 500 k steps
on the simulated set described in Section IV-A1 and ﬁne-
tuned for 50 k steps on the more realistic set introduced in
Section IV-A2. The models are optimized using the well-
know ADAM algorithm with gradient clipping and learning
rate decay. For all models the ASR-loss weight is ﬁxed at
λASR = 1e− 4 and a window size 32 ms and shift 16 ms
are used in the ACS STFT with size 512. For the BCS, while
window size and shift stay the same, the STFT size is reduced
by the factor 8 kHz/f BCS
max due to the reduced sampling rate.
A. BCS frequency range reduction
Other published enhancement networks, which rely on BCS
to estimate a mask for the ACS use either a time-domain input
[16] or the full spectrum of the BCS as input [8]. To reduce
the bandwidth this work evaluates the impact of reducing the
BCS to frequencies below f BCS
max on the WER. The sampling
rate is 16 kHz sof BCS
max of 8 kHz corresponds to full bandwidth.
In Fig. 3 the WER on the full hard test set for for different
f BCS
max with and without the upscaling module are shown. Note,
that these results are calculated on the full set without special
treatment for distorted BCSs.
Utilizing the upscaling module leads to an increased per-
formance across the considered range of f BCS
max with the ex-
ception of 1 kHz. This result implies that despite the low-pass
characteristic of the BCS the model still beneﬁts from the
information in the higher frequency bands. The model with
f BCS
max = 500 Hz and the upscaling module shows the best ratio
between bandwidth reduction and WER increase, with less
than 1.5 % absolute WER increase and a bandwidth reduction
to 6.25 % of the original bandwidth.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 02:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

0.25 0.5 1 2 4 8
14
16
18
f BCS
max in kHz
WER in %
Disable Upscale
Enable Upscale
Fig. 3. WER results after BCS-guides enhancer for different f BCS
max on the full
Hard test set without V AD.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
16
18
20
22
0
20
40
60
80
100
Lmax
i in %
WER in %
|Si| /|S| in %
Noisy
Enhanced 500 Hz
Enhanced 8 kHz
Fig. 4. WER results on subsets Si of the hard eval set with different BCS
quality. The black dashed line symbolizes the share of all examples in the
hard set that is contained in each subset.
B. Inﬂuence of VAD estimation
In this section the impact of the distorted BCS on enhance-
ment is evaluated. To this end, the hard test set S is split
into I overlapping subsets Si with different quality of BCS.
The quality of the BCSs is determined by generating a per
frame V AD estimation on the BCS. Each subset Si consists
of examples for which activity is detected in less than Lmax
i
percentage of the frames in the keyword BCS.
The results are depicted in Fig. 4. There is a clear correlation
between BCS quality symbolized byLmax
i and the WER. These
results suggests, that the enhancement distorts the noisy signal
further, increasing the WER, for examples with less than 60 %
detected activity in the keyword BCS. In other words, for
around 40 % of the hard set the enhancement does not lead
to improvements and it is beneﬁcial to run the WER on the
unprocessed ACS instead. However, this optimal threshold is
dependent on the data set and the exact number of frames in
the keyword might not be known. Therefore, we decided to set
the threshold to Lmax
i = 0.0, which means we assume that the
input signal leads to a better performance than the enhanced
signal if no activity was detected in the keyword BCS.
The WER performance with and without limiting the en-
hancement to BCS with detected speech are displayed in
Table II. The proposed approach leads to gains for both models
for both the Hard and Moderate set. However, the results
slightly degrade for the Dynamic set. These results suggest
that using the V AD is beneﬁcial, since the gains are larger than
the degradation on the Dynamic set. Also note that when using
detection for uninformative BCS the performance gap between
the 0.5 kHz versus full bandwidth model falls to 0.8 %.
TABLE II
WER RESULTS WITH THE PROPOSED ENHANCEMENT MODELS WITH AND
WITHOUT THE VAD TO DETECT DISTORTED BCS. T HE BEST RESULTS PER
SET ARE SHADED GRAY .
System V AD WER / %
Easy Mod. Hard Dynamic
Unprocessed – 6.4 5.9 18 .1 17 .2
Proposed 500 Hz  6.2 6 .8 16 .8 10 .6
 6.2 6 .2 15 .8 10 .9
Proposed 8 kHz  6.3 6 .8 15 .6 10.5
 6.3 6 .2 15.0 10 .8
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF WER FOR THE PROPOSED ENHANCER WITH A
MULTI -CHANNEL ENHANCEMENT ALGORITHM FINETUNED ON EARBUDS
DATA. T HE CELLS WITH THE BEST VALUES PER SET ARE SHADED GRAY .
System RTF WER / %
Easy Mod. Hard Dynamic
Unprocessed 0.00 6 .4 5.9 18 .1 17 .2
McEnhancer S 0.01 6 .4 6 .5 17 .2 15 .3
McEnhancer L 0.39 7 .5 7 .2 13.9 16 .4
Proposed 500 Hz 0.01 6.2 6 .2 15 .8 10 .9
Proposed 8 kHz 0.01 6 .3 6 .2 15 .0 10.8
C. Comparison to a Multi-Channel Enhancer
In this section the proposed algorithm is compared with a
state-of-the-art model. The multi-channel enhancement system
introduced in [18], from now on called McEnhancer, is used
as a baseline. We compare with both the largest (L) and
smallest (S) variant of McEnhancer since the smallest version
is closer in size and speed to the considered enhancement
model architecture. These baseline models are trained on an
earbuds independent dataset and ﬁnetuned to the speciﬁc task
for 50 k steps on the set described in Section IV-A2. The input
to the model is two channels of ACS from microphones on
the exterior of the earbuds. The V AD-based decision whether
or not to run the enhancement is only used for the proposed
model and not for McEnhancer, which does not use the BCS.
The models are compared in terms of WER and RTF.
The results are presented in Table III. Both the models with
f BCS
max = 500 Hz and f BCS
max = 8 kHz show more consistent
results than the McEnhancer. Especially on the dynamic set
both models signiﬁcantly outperform the larger McEnhancer
model. The larger enhancer only leads to clear improvements
over the proposed models on the hard set, indicating some
room for improvement by increasing the complexity of the
proposed model.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work a novel BCS-guided enhancement network
for voice assistants on earbuds was presented. In the most
difﬁcult cases with interfering noise sources or wind of at least
6 m/s, a reduction in relative WER of more than 15 % was
demonstrated. It was shown that compliance with challenging
transmission bandwidth requirements can be achieved through
selection of an appropriate upper frequency and the addition of
an upscaling module resulting in small impact on WER. The
proposed network is shown to outperform a signiﬁcantly more
computational-complex multi-channel enhancement networks
ﬁnetuned on earbuds. In future work, other approaches to
recognize distorted BCS signals should be evaluated and the
correlation of those distortions to wind speed will be analyzed.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 02:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

REFERENCES
[1] K. Kinoshita, T. Ochiai, M. Delcroix, and T. Nakatani, “Improving
Noise Robust Automatic Speech Recognition with Single-Channel Time-
Domain Enhancement Network,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP , 2020.
[2] Q. Wang, H. Muckenhirn, K. Wilson, P. Sridhar, Z. Wu, J. R. Hershey,
R. A. Saurous, R. J. Weiss, Y . Jia, and I. Lopez Moreno, “V oiceFilter:
Targeted voice separation by speaker-conditioned spectrogram masking,”
in Proc. InterSpeech, 2019.
[3] K. ˇZmol´ıkov´a, M. Delcroix, K. Kinoshita, T. Ochiai, T. Nakatani,
L. Burget, and J. ˇCernock´y, “SpeakerBeam: Speaker Aware Neural
Network for Target Speaker Extraction in Speech Mixtures,” IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing , vol. 13, no. 4, 2019.
[4] J. Caroselli, A. Narayanan, N. Howard, and T. O’Malley, “Cleanformer:
A Multichannel Array Conﬁguration-Invariant Neural Enhancement
Frontend for ASR in Smart Speakers,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP , 2023.
[5] S. Araki, T. Hayashi, M. Delcroix, M. Fujimoto, K. Takeda, and
T. Nakatani, “Exploring multi-channel features for denoising-
autoencoder-based speech enhancement,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP), 2015.
[6] X. Sun, J. Xiong, C. Feng, H. Li, Y . Wu, D. Fang, and X. Chen,
“EarSSR: Silent Speech Recognition via Earphones,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing , vol. 23, no. 8, 2024.
[7] Y . Zhou, Y . Chen, Y . Ma, and H. Liu, “A real-time dual-microphone
speech enhancement algorithm assisted by bone conduction sensor,”
Sensors, vol. 20, no. 18, 2020.
[8] H. Wang, X. Zhang, and D. Wang, “Fusing Bone-Conduction and
Air-Conduction Sensors for Complex-Domain Speech Enhancement,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing ,
vol. 30, 2022.
[9] M. Wang, J. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Huang, and S. Rahardja, “Multi-modal
speech enhancement with bone-conducted speech in time domain,”
Applied Acoustics, vol. 200, 2022.
[10] Lixing He, Haozheng Hou, Shuyao Shi, Xian Shuai, and Zhenyu
Yan, “Towards bone-conducted vibration speech enhancement on head-
mounted wearables,” in Proceedings MobiSys, 2023.
[11] H. S. Shin, H.-G. Kang, and T. Fingscheidt, “Survey of speech
enhancement supported by a bone conduction microphone,” in Proc.
ITG Symposium, 2012.
[12] R. E. Bouserhal, T. H. Falk, and J. V oix, “In-ear microphone speech
quality enhancement via adaptive ﬁltering and artiﬁcial bandwidth
extension,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , vol. 141,
no. 3, 2017.
[13] J. Hauret, T. Joubaud, V . Zimpfer, and ´E. Bavu, “Conﬁgurable eben: Ex-
treme bandwidth extension network to enhance body-conducted speech
capture,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, vol. 31, 2023.
[14] Li Y . Misiunas K. Roblek D. Tagliasacchi, M., “SEANet: A Multi-modal
Speech Enhancement Network,” in Proc. InterSpeech, 2020.
[15] M. Wang, J. Chen, X.-L. Zhang, and S. Rahardja, “End-to-End Multi-
Modal Speech Recognition on an Air and Bone Conducted Speech
Corpus,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, vol. 31, 2023.
[16] C. Yu, K.-H. Hung, S.-S. Wang, Y . Tsao, and J. Hung, “Time-domain
multi-modal bone/air conducted speech enhancement,” IEEE Signal
Processing Letters, vol. 27, pp. 1035–1039, 2020.
[17] Jens Heitkaemper, Darius Jakobeit, Christoph Boeddeker, Lukas Drude,
and Reinhold Haeb-Umbach, “Demystifying tasnet: A dissecting ap-
proach,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP , 2020.
[18] J. Heitkaemper, J. Caroselli, A. Narayanan, and N. Howard, “TfClean-
former: A streaming, array-agnostic, full- and sub-band modeling front-
end for robust ASR,” in Proc. InterSpeech, 2024.
[19] R. Talmon, I. Cohen, and S. Gannot, “Relative Transfer Function
Identiﬁcation Using Convolutive Transfer Function Approximation,”
IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , vol.
17, no. 4, pp. 546–555, 2009.
[20] H. S. Shin, T. Fingscheidt, and H.-G. Kang, “A Priori SNR Estimation
Using Air- and Bone-Conduction Microphones,” IEEE/ACM Transac-
tions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 23, no. 11, 2015.
[21] N. Howard, A. Park, T. Z. Shabestary, A. Gruenstein, and R. Prab-
havalkar, “A neural acoustic echo canceller optimized using an automatic
speech recognizer and large scale synthetic data,” inProc. IEEE ICASSP,
2021.
[22] Jonathan Le Roux, Scott Wisdom, Hakan Erdogan, and John R Hershey,
“SDR–half-baked or well done?,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP , 2019.
[23] J. Hauret, M. Olivier, T. Joubaud, C. Langrenne, S. Poir ´ee, V . Zimpfer,
and ´E Bavu, “Vibravox: A Dataset of French Speech Captured with
Body-conduction Audio Sensors,” arXiv preprint: 2407.11828 , 2024.
[24] V . Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Librispeech:
An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,” in Proc. IEEE
ICASSP, 2015.
[25] J. Kearns, “Librivox: Free public domain audiobooks,” Reference
Reviews, 2014.
[26] C. Kim, A. Misra, K. Chin, T. Hughes, A. Narayanan, T. N. Sainath, and
M. Bacchiani, “Generation of large-scale simulated utterances in virtual
rooms to train deep-neural networks for far-ﬁeld speech recognition in
Google Home,” in Proc. InterSpeech, 2017.
[27] Getty Images, “Getty Images Music,”
https://www.gettyimages.com/about-music, Oct. 2022.
[28] YouTube, “YouTube Studio Audio Library,”
https://youtube.com/audiolibrary, Oct. 2022.
[29] S. Bijwadia, S. Chang, B. Li, T. Sainath, C. Zhang, and Y . He, “Uniﬁed
End-to-End Speech Recognition and Endpointing for Fast and Efﬁcient
Speech Systems,” in Proc. IEEE SLT , 2022.
[30] T. N. Sainath, Y . R. He, A. Narayanan, R. Botros, R. Pang, D. J.
Rybach, C. Allauzen, E. Variani, J. Qin, A. Gruenstein, et al., “An
Efﬁcient Streaming Non-Recurrent On-Device End-to-End Model with
Improvements to Rare-Word Modeling,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 02:48:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 