IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 22, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014
2207
Direction-of-Arrival Based SNR Estimation for
Dual-Microphone Speech Enhancement
Seon Man Kim and Hong Kook Kim, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a method for estimating
target speech by exploring the spatial cues in adverse noise
environments. This method is able to reliably estimate the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) using the phase difference obtained
from dual-microphone signals. To this end, spatial cues such as
the phase difference are used to estimate the target-to-non-target
directional signal ratio (TNR). Based on the estimated TNR, a
direction-of-arrival (DOA)-based SNR is then estimated by using
a statistical model-based log-likelihood ratio test for the target
speech activity decision followed by a decision-directed approach.
The estimate is then incorporated into a Wiener ﬁlter in order to
obtain a spectral-gain attenuator. The perceptual evaluation of
speech quality shows that the performance of a dual-microphone
speech enhancement system employing the proposed estimation
method outperforms single- and dual-microphone speech en-
hancement systems that use conventional methods such as Wiener
ﬁltering, beamforming, or phase-error-based ﬁltering under noise
conditions whose SNR ranges from 0 to 20 dB.
Index Terms—Direction-of-arrival, dual-microphone signal,
signal-to-noise ratio, spatial cue, speech enhancement, target-to-
non-target directional signal ratio.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
ECENTLY, speech enhancement in noisy environments
has attracted a great deal of research interest, especially
in applications such as mobile voice communications, automatic
speech recognition, and hearing aids [1]–[4]. The goal of speech
enhancement is to suppress additive background noise compo-
nents while maintaining the quality and intelligibility of speech
[1]. This task is usually accomplished by preserving the char-
acteristics of speech using the short-term spectral amplitude
(STSA), for which the reliable estimation of the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) is crucial in noisy environments [1], [2].
The SNR estimation generally involves two steps: a noise
variance estimation and an SNR computation that is based on
the estimated noise variance [1], [3]. For the SNR computation,
Manuscript received January 28, 2014; revised May 07, 2014; accepted
September 22, 2014. Date of publication September 26, 2014; date of current
version November 05, 2014. This work was supported in part by a National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Ministry of Science,
ICT and Future Planning (MSIP) (No. 2012-010636), and ICT R&D program
of MSIP/IITP [2014-044-055-002, Loudness Based Broadcasting Loudness
and Stress Assessment of Indoor Environment Noises]. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was
Dr. Man-Wai Mak.
S. M. Kim is with the Institute of Sound and Vibration Research
(ISVR), University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, U.K. (e-mail:
kobem30002@gmail.com).
H. K. Kim is with the School of Information and Communications, Gwangju
Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju 500-712, Korea (e-mail:
hongkook@gist.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TASLP.2014.2360646
it has been reported that a decision-directed (DD) approach, in
which the decision was based on the a priori and a posteriori
SNR estimates, provided a simple but effective solution with a
reasonable computational cost [2]. However, since the a poste-
riori SNR estimate is directly obtained from the noisy speech
and the estimated noise variance, an unreliable noise variance
estimate can affect the SNR estimation, which can then distort
the estimated clean speech in severely adverse noise environ-
ments [2]. Thus, accurate noise variance estimation plays an im-
portant role in reliable SNR estimation; however, it may also be
unreliable in adverse noise environments [2], [3].
To improve the speech enhancement performance in ad-
verse noise environments, multiple-microphone systems are
increasingly becoming popular despite their additional cost
since they result in a better performance than can be obtained
by single-microphone speech enhancement algorithms [4]. As
opposed to only time information from a single microphone
signal, multiple-microphone signals allow additional spatial
cues to be exploited because the direction-of-arrival (DOA) of
target speech is strongly linked to the phase difference between
multiple-microphone signals [4]–[6]. Thus, by assuming that
only one sound source power is dominant in each time-fre-
quency (T-F) bin, the dominance of the target speech’s presence
or absence in each T-F bin can be determined using the phase
difference [5]–[10]. This binary decision has become quite
well-known for achieving a good performance [5]–[10]. How-
ever, enhanced speech continues to suffer from musical noise,
because the inherent discontinuous zero-paddings result in
artifact distortions in the estimated target signal. This problem
is even worse in real world environments where the sparseness
assumption cannot quite be satisﬁed.
On one hand, under non-sparse conditions, the phase differ-
ence from a directional target speech signal would be variable
due to non-target-directional noises. Thus, the binary decision
for the dominance of the target speech in each T-F bin would be
inappropriate [10]–[19]. For example, a beamformer was uti-
lized to construct the directional sensitivity—referred to as the
spatial directivity pattern (SDP)—and attenuate spatially-un-
wanted noises arising from non-target directions [14]–[16]. A
post-ﬁltering technique was also utilized to further improve the
noise reduction performance of the beamformer [4], [17], and
an independent component analysis (ICA) based blind source
separation (BSS) was used to estimate the acoustic paths from
the sound sources to each microphone [18]. In addition, a soft-
masking method, which was referred to as a phase-error-based
ﬁlter (PEF) [19], was employed as the spectral-gain function of
phase differences. This approach was motivated by the fact that
phase difference errors between the dual-microphone signals
were related to the SNR of the observed noisy speech signal.
2329-9290 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.


2208
IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 22, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014
However, since the phase difference of the target speech is
estimated based on target DOA information, an unreliable DOA
estimate can distort the estimated clean speech in a PEF or a
beamformer [4], [19]. Thus, the accurate DOA estimation of
the target speech plays an important role in the reliability of the
target speech estimation. However, it may also be unreliable in
adverse noise environments [4]. Since the accurate estimation
of the target DOA is beyond the scope of this paper, this paper
assumes that the target DOA is known a priori.
Besides the DOA problem, the strategies of using beam-
formers, ICA-based BSS, PEF, and post-ﬁltering techniques
limit the performance of dual-microphone speech enhance-
ments due to the following reasons. First, the SDPs of a
beamformer were constrained by the number of microphones.
In other words, the performance of beamformer-based speech
enhancement systems was found to be highly dependent on
the number of microphones used [4]. Thus, the performance
obtained via dual-microphones might not be satisfactory,
compared to the masking-based methods such as PEF [19].
Second, for the acoustic path estimation in an ICA-based
BSS, the number of sound sources should be smaller than or
equal to that of the microphones, which might be impractical
[18], [20]. Third, PEF was effective at reducing non-target
directional noise under low SNR conditions, but it could distort
the target-directional speech at high SNRs [19]. Moreover, a
beamformer-based post-ﬁltering technique estimates the spec-
tral-gain attenuator by utilizing the power ratio between the
input and output signals of the beamformer, and the estimated
spectral-gain attenuator was then applied to the beamformer
output signal to further reduce the noise components. How-
ever, since such a post-ﬁltering technique was similar to PEF
[19], the performance at a high SNR was poorer than those
at low SNRs. Nevertheless, when the DOA of target speech
is uncertain, the performance of non-target directional signal
attenuation by the PEF could be worse than that by a single-mi-
crophone technique using a temporal cue. This is because PEF
works only on the basis of a DOA cue represented by phase
differences [19]. Accordingly, it could be more beneﬁcial for
better spectral estimate to use both the temporal and DOA cues
than to use either of them.
As motivated above, this paper proposes a method for
estimating the target speech in a dual-microphone speech
enhancement system by exploring the spatial cues in adverse
noise environments in order to reliably estimate the SNR using
the phase difference obtained from dual-microphone signals.
First, spatial cues such as the phase difference are derived as
a form of target-to-non-target directional signal ratio (TNR),
which is deﬁned as the power ratio between the target-direc-
tional enhanced and rejected signals [21]. Next, a DOA-based
SNR is deﬁned using the TNR, from which a DOA-based
SNR estimation method is also proposed. Then, the estimated
DOA-based SNR is incorporated into a Wiener ﬁlter in order
to obtain a spectral-gain attenuator. Finally, the performance of
a dual-microphone speech enhancement system employing the
proposed method is evaluated by measuring the source-to-dis-
tortion ratio (SDR), source-to-interference ratio (SIR), and
source-to-artifacts ratio (SAR) [22] under interference speech
conditions whose SNR ranges from 0 to 20 dB. In addition,
we evaluate the performance by measuring the perceptual
evaluation of speech quality (PESQ) scores [23] under four
Fig. 1. Block diagram of a dual-microphone speech enhancement system that
utilizes the phase differences as spatial cues.
different noise conditions such as interference speech, factory,
vacuum cleaner, and white noise. Finally, we compare the
performance of a dual-microphone speech enhancement system
employing the proposed method with that of a conventional
one using either a super-directive beamformer (SDB) [4], [14],
[15], a generalized sidelobe canceller (GSC) [16] followed
by a post Wiener ﬁlter (GSC-PW), PEF [19], or an angular
spectrum-based masking method (ASBM) [24].1
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
brieﬂy reviews a dual-microphone speech enhancement system
using a spatial cue such as the phase differences between dual-
microphone signals. Section III proposes a DOA-based SNR
estimation method to improve the performance of a dual-mi-
crophone speech enhancement system. Section IV evaluates the
performance of a dual-microphone speech enhancement system
employing the proposed method and compares it with those of
conventional single- and dual-microphone speech enhancement
systems. Finally, our ﬁndings are summarized in Section V.
II. DUAL-MICROPHONE SPEECH ENHANCEMENT
USING PHASE DIFFERENCES
In this section, we brieﬂy describe a dual-microphone speech
enhancement system that utilizes spatial cues estimated from
dual-microphone signals. As shown in Fig. 1, spatial cues such
as the phase differences between dual-microphone signals are
ﬁrst estimated. Then, the spectral gain for estimating target
speech is obtained from the estimated phase differences.
In order to model dual-microphone signals, we assume that
sound sources can be classiﬁed into target and non-target di-
rectional sources, and that the target directional speech source
is located far enough from the microphone array, which is re-
ferred to as the acoustic far ﬁeld condition. In other words,
the target-directional speech is free from any room reverbera-
tion effects since only the direct path is considered in modeling
dual-microphone input signals. Then, the
-th spectral compo-
nent of the
-th microphone signal at the -th frame,
,
can be represented as
(1)
(2)
where
is the
-th spectral
component representing the target directional source, and
is each microphone-recorded version of
the non-target directional source
[4], [19]. Note here
that
denotes the total number of frequency bins. In addition,
is the time difference-of-arrival (TDOA) between the two
1All abbreviations in this paper were listed in Appendix I.


KIM AND KIM: DOA BASED SNR ESTIMATION FOR DUAL-MICROPHONE SPEECH ENHANCEMENT
2209
microphones, and
is the angular frequency in
radians at the
-th frequency bin. Here, we can also assume
that the DOA of the desired signal source is either easily pre-
dictable or known a priori, such as for an interlocutor-facing
hearing-aid wearer [4] or a driver in a car telematics system [2],
[25]. Moreover, even when it is difﬁcult to predict the DOA of
the desired signal source, the TDOA can be estimated before
applying a speech enhancement algorithm. To this end, we can
apply popular localization algorithms such as the generalized
cross correlation (GCC) or steered response power (SRP) with
phase transform (PHAT) weighting
[4], [19]. For
example, the TDOA estimate by GCC-PHAT,
, is repre-
sented as [19]
(3)
where
and
is
a
complex
conjugate
operator.
Next,
by
multiplying
into
in (2),
can be rewritten as
. Then, assuming
, we
have
(4)
where
also becomes a non-
target directional source.
As shown in Fig. 1, dual-microphone speech enhance-
ment algorithms such as binary masking, beamformers, and
PEF attempt to estimate the spectrum of the target direc-
tional signal,
, in the form
or
, where
is the spectral-gain
attenuator estimated from spatial cues such as the phase dif-
ferences between dual-microphone signals. For example, when
the dual-microphone beamforming output from (1) and (4) is
denoted as
, the transfer function of the beamformer,
, for the target-directional source is
given by
(5)
where
denotes a beamformer weight of the
-th microphone signal [4], [14], [21], and
is a phase
difference between
and
.
Depending on the process how the beamformer weights
are chosen, beamformers are classiﬁed as either data-inde-
pendent or data-dependent [14]. To be speciﬁc, the weights in
data-independent beamformers are designed so that the spatial
directivity approximates a desired pattern, which is indepen-
dent of the array input data; a delay-and-sum beamformer
(DSB) or blocking matrix (BM) belongs to such a category.
Conversely, the weights in data-dependent beamformers are
determined based on the statistics of the input audio signals. As
an example of a data-dependent beamformer, a super-directive
beamformer (SDB) has been designed to obtain an optimal
performance on the diffuse noise ﬁeld, in which the beam-
former weights
are derived as
[4], [15]. Here,
represents
the Hermitian operator,
, and
denotes the coherence matrix of the diffuse noise sound ﬁeld,
whose element
represents the coherence
between the
-th and
-th microphones [15], [17] where
is the distance between the
-th and
-th microphones and
is the speed of sound (
m s in dry air). The perfor-
mance of beamformer-based speech enhancement systems are
highly dependent on the number of microphones used [4]. For
example, the performance of an SDB implemented with dual
microphones might be worse than that of a PEF [19].
As another example, PEF is motivated by the fact that the
error in phase difference between dual-microphone signals
varies depending on the power ratio between the target and
non-target directional signals, i.e., TNR. The TNR at the
-th
spectral component and the -th frame,
, is deﬁned as [21]
(6)
where
and
are respectively the
-th spectral com-
ponents of the target directional source signal and non-target
directional signal at the -th frame. Then, the TNR-based spec-
tral-gain attenuator,
, can be derived by employing the
Wiener ﬁlter formulation as
(7)
where
is a constant used to control the degree of noise attenu-
ation, in which a higher value of
results in better performance
at low input TNRs but worse performance at high input TNRs
[19], [21].
PEF attempts to ﬁnd a corresponding TNR,
, to de-
termine the phase difference
between
and
, which is then utilized to estimate
. It has been
reported in [19] that
is related to the phase difference, and
the inverse of the squared phase difference,
, can
be used to approximate
. Thus, PEF uses
instead of
in order to obtain the spectral-gain attenuator,
which is then denoted as
[19], i.e.,
(8)
It has been shown that the PEF provided a higher digit recog-
nition accuracy than both the dual-microphone SDB and the
beamformer with a post-ﬁlter [19]. Thus, it was postulated that
the PEF could be effective in non-target directional noise sup-
pression, potentially improving the desired signal performance.
However, though the PEF was effective at reducing non-target
directional signals under low TNR conditions, it could distort
the target-directional desired signal at high TNRs [19]. This
could be a major drawback with the PEF since the phase dif-
ference-based TNR estimation approach may be unreliable, al-
though it gives better performance than other dual-microphone
speech enhancement algorithms.
Consequently, the phase difference is seen to play a crucial
role in estimating the spectral-gain attenuator using spatial
cues. Therefore, it is important how phase differences are
utilized for the reliable enhancement of target noisy speech
components; this paper attempts to provide a solution to deal
with this problem.


2210
IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 22, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014
Fig. 2. Block diagram of a dual-microphone speech enhancement system em-
ploying the proposed SNR estimation method.
III. PROPOSED DOA-BASED SNR ESTIMATION USING
DUAL-MICROPHONE SIGNALS
As mentioned in Section I, the performance of a speech en-
hancement method using a single-microphone signal such as
the Wiener ﬁlter may be poorer than that of a speech enhance-
ment method using multiple-microphone signals; however, the
better a priori SNR estimation can provide a more accurate
spectral-gain attenuation [1]. Thus, in this section, an SNR-esti-
mation method based on dual-microphone phase differences is
proposed in order to reliably utilize spatial cues for the target
speech estimation.
Fig. 2 shows a block diagram of the proposed method. First,
the phase difference,
, between
and a time-
aligned version of
,
, is estimated and utilized
to obtain a TNR estimate,
. Next,
is used to estimate
the DOA-based SNR,
, which is also utilized to reliably
obtain an SNR estimate,
. Finally, a speech enhancement
spectral-gain attenuator,
, is obtained on the basis of
, which is subsequently applied to the ﬁrst or second mi-
crophone noisy speech signal.2
A. TNR Estimation
As shown in (7) and (8), the spectral-gain attenuator realized
by
was found to provide better speech
enhancement performance than a beamforming algorithm [19].
In this subsection, we explain the TNR estimation method that
is based on the phase differences.
For this task, we use the spectral-gain function of phase
difference that is developed for a beamformer as in (5). Fortu-
nately, this spectral-gain function makes it possible to improve
the performance of the beamformer by replacing the phase
difference,
, with its frequency-normalized version,
. This is because we understand
that a beamforming function employing
enables a
better performance than employing
; the performance
beneﬁt from using
instead of
was also
reported in [5] and [10]. Thus, we can obtain the DSB transfer
function to estimate the target-directional speech,
,
2In this paper, the spectral gain is applied to the ﬁrst microphone signal,
.
where the beamformer weights for DSB are expressed as
and
[4]. That is,
(9)
On the other hand, since
and
, the transfer function of a BM,
, can be
obtained to reject the target-directional speech [4] as
(10)
By
multiplying
by
and
,
the estimates of
and
can be obtained as
and
,
respectively. Finally, as derived in Appendix II of this paper,
the TNR estimate,
, can be obtained as
the ratio between the two transfer functions of
and
, such that3
(11)
Consequently, as shown in (11), the TNR can be estimated by
only using the phase difference term. In the next subsection, it
is explored how the DOA-based SNR can be estimated with this
TNR estimate.
B. DOA-Based SNR Estimation
For the dual-microphone array given in (1) and (4), we
assume that each target-directional signal,
, or non-target
signal,
, can be decomposed into the target speech,
,
and noise,
. In other words, we assume that
can
be represented as
, where
and
denote the target- and non-target-directional noise
spectral components, respectively. Similar to
,
can
be represented as
, where
and
also denote the target- and non-target-directional speech
spectral components, respectively. Even if
can be af-
fected by reverberation effects in real environments,
can be negligible when the target speech comes close to the
microphones. Consequently, we can assume
.
Therefore, two hypotheses pertaining to target speech activity,
and
, can then be represented as
(12)
The above equation can subsequently be extended as
(13)
Since
, the
two hypotheses above can be represented as
(14)
3Hereafter within this section, we remove the frequency bin index
in equa-
tions to improve the readability.


KIM AND KIM: DOA BASED SNR ESTIMATION FOR DUAL-MICROPHONE SPEECH ENHANCEMENT
2211
where
and
denote
and
,
respectively.
Next,
we
can
deﬁne
the
DOA-based SNR,
, as
(15)
where
and
denote the expected values of
and
, which are deﬁned as
and
, respectively. To obtain an estimate of
,
and
should be estimated. First, the
estimate of
,
, can be obtained through a recursive
procedure with a smoothing parameter
, such that
(16)
Note that (16) is performed only when
is true, in which the
decision is based on the statistical model-based log-likelihood
ratio test (LRT) for the target speech activity decision [26] used
in this paper.
On the other hand, to obtain the estimate of
in (15),
i.e.,
, a Wiener ﬁltering procedure is employed as
(17)
where
is estimated using a DD approach [1], [2], such that
(18)
where
is the smoothing parameter. Consequently, we
can obtain the DOA-based SNR estimate as
by using
in (17) and
in
(16).
C. SNR Update by a Posteriori SNR
By using the estimate of the DOA-based SNR,
, the
SNR,
, can also be estimated using a DD approach as
(19)
where
is the smoothing parameter. In (19),
is the estimate of the a posteriori SNR, which is expressed as
(20)
where
is the noise variance estimate, and can be esti-
mated via a recursive procedure with a smoothing parameter
, such that
is true
(21)
D. Target Speech Reconstruction
The proposed noise attenuating spectral gain for the speech
enhancement based on the Wiener ﬁlter,
, is repre-
sented as
(22)
Fig. 3. The geometric conﬁguration of a room environment simulation for ob-
taining dual-microphone noisy speech signals.
where
is obtained in (19). Thus, the target speech spec-
tral estimate,
, can be obtained by multiplying
by
, which is transformed back into a time domain signal.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluated the performance of a speech en-
hancement system employing the proposed DOA-based SNR
estimation approach. Fig. 3 illustrates the geometric conﬁgura-
tion for the simulation setup to obtain dual-microphone noisy
speech signals in a reverberant room. In this paper, even though
the proposed method was developed without considering any
reverberant effects of the target speech signals, we attempted to
evaluate the performance of the proposed method in reverbera-
tion environments. To this end, we assumed that a reverberant
room had dimensions of
m
m
m and a dual-microphone
system with 4-cm spacing was located in the room. Here, four
reverberation times (RT60s) of 0, 100, 200, and 300 ms were
modeled using the image source method (ISM) [27], [28]. For
the ISM, early and lateral reﬂections were all considered by the
diffused decay model in [28].
For an intensive analysis, we considered two target speech
source locations and four noise source locations, as shown in
Fig. 3. All the heights of sources and microphones were set to
1.5 m. In this simulation, we utilized ten target speech utter-
ances (ﬁve males and ﬁve females) from the TIMIT database
[29]. The target speech sources were located along the azimuth
directions of
and
on a circle of 1 m radius, which
were referred to as
and
, respectively. In order to test the
robustness against speech interference, four interfering speech
sources from the TIMIT database [29] were positioned along
the azimuth directions of
,
,
, and
on a circle at
a radius of 2 m; these were referred to as N1, N2, N3, and N4.
We combined two speech-source and four noise-source
locations to construct six different scenarios, as described in
Table I. They were S2-N1, S2-N2, S2-N3, S1-N3, S1-N4-N1,
and S2-N3-N1. Among them, S2-N1, S2-N2, and S2-N3, which
were respectively referred to as Case 1, Case 2, and Case 3,
were comparably easier scenarios than others, because the
sources were located on the opposite side. On the other hand,
S1-N3 (referred to as Case 4) was the most difﬁcult because the
sources were located close to one another and they had very


2212
IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 22, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014
TABLE I
SIMULATION SCENARIOS ACCORDING TO SPEECH
AND NOISE SOURCE LOCATIONS
similar DOAs. Furthermore, two-noise mixture scenarios such
as S1-N1-N4 and S2-N3-N1 were respectively referred to as
Case 5 and Case 6. Consequently, to evaluate the noise-robust
speech enhancement performance, 50 test noisy speech signals
(10 signals at different SNRs of 0, 5, 10, 15, or 20 dB) were
prepared for each scenario (Cases 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6) under
each reverberation time of 0, 100, 200, and 300 ms.
A. Algorithm Implementation
For the simulation, it was assumed that all TDOAs
’s were
known a priori, i.e.
, instead of using the TDOA estimate
in (3). Furthermore, each test signal was down-sampled from
16 kHz to 8 kHz, then segmented into consecutive frames by
half-overlapping a cosine window with a length of 32 ms, which
corresponded to 256 samples at a sampling rate of 8 kHz. In
this paper, SIR, SAR, and SDR were measured to evaluate the
performance of the speech enhancement algorithms in noisy
environments [22].
The true clean target signal,
, and its estimate,
,
were related by
, where
,
, and
were the er-
rors associated with the interference, noise, and artifacts, re-
spectively; they were obtained through a least-square projection
[22]. By using those errors, SIR, SAR, and SDR were deﬁned
as [22]
(23)
(24)
(25)
where
is the norm operator.
As shown in (23)–(25), the SIR could mainly measure how
well the algorithm suppressed interfering sources, while SAR
measured how many artifacts remained in the separated (target)
source. SDR was a global performance index, which might give
a better assessment of the overall performance of the algorithms
under comparison by considering both the interference and ar-
tifact components. Note that the left (or the ﬁrst) microphone
signal of the dual-microphone system was used as the reference
for measuring SDR, SIR, and SAR in this paper.
In order to select proper values for
in (16),
in (18),
in
(19), and
in (21), we measured the SDR values according to
different values of
,
,
, and
for all SNRs, RT60s, and
scenarios. Consequently, it was found that setting
in (16),
in (18),
in (19), and
Fig. 4. Comparison of SDR values averaged over (a) high SNRs (15 and 20 dB)
and (b) low SNRs (0, 5, and 10 dB) between PEF and the proposed TNR method
for Case 1 with no reverberation (
ms), according to the different
values of
.
in (21) provided the maximized SDR value. Thus, we set those
parameters as ﬁxed for all the simulations.
B. Objective Quality Test and Results
We compared the speech enhancement performance of
in (11) with that of
in (8) according to
the parameter
that controls the degree of noise attenuation.
To this end, we implemented the TNR-based spectral gain
using
. Fig. 4 shows the comparison of SDR
values of the signals processed by the PEF method in (8) and
the proposed method in (11), where
varied from 0.1 to 15.
Note that the SDR values for Case 1 were averaged over high
SNRs (15 and 20 dB SNRs) or low SNRs (0, 5, and 10 dB
SNRs). It was shown from the ﬁgure that the proposed TNR
and PEF methods provided the highest SDR values when
was about 1 and 5, respectively, under high SNR conditions.
On the other hand, at low SNRs, the proposed TNR achieved
the highest SDR value when
was about 3, and higher SDR
values than PEF for all
’s. This implies that the proposed TNR
method can provide better speech enhancement performance
than the conventional PEF by properly setting
.
Figs. 5(a) and (b) show the spectrograms of the target-direc-
tional desired speech and its noise-contaminated version at 5 dB
SNR for Case 1, respectively, under no reverberation condition,
i.e.,
ms. In addition, Fig. 5(c) was obtained by ap-
plying the spectral gain
with
, based on the
TNR estimate
to Fig. 5(b). In addition, Fig. 5(d) was ob-
tained by applying the proposed
in (22) to Fig. 5(b).
It was shown from the ﬁgure that the proposed TNR method
effectively suppressed the non-target-directional noise compo-
nents. Moreover, it was shown by comparing Figs. 5(c) and 5(d)


KIM AND KIM: DOA BASED SNR ESTIMATION FOR DUAL-MICROPHONE SPEECH ENHANCEMENT
2213
Fig. 5. Step-by-step illustrations of: spectrograms of (a) clean male speech,
(b) interference speech contaminated by noisy speech at 5 dB SNR in Case
1 (target speech at
and noise at
) under no reverberation conditions,
(c) signal processed by
, and (d) signal processed by
.
Fig. 6. Illustration of (a) the noisy speech signal at 5 dB SNR of Case 1 with
no reverberation, and the SNRs estimated by the conventional and proposed
methods at (b) 1 kHz, (c) 2 kHz, and (d) 3 kHz.
that
could provide more suppressed non-target-direc-
tional noise components and more-reﬁned target speech than
.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method fur-
ther, the proposed SNR estimate,
in (19), was compared
to the conventional DD-based estimate in [3], where the true
SNR was used as a reference. Fig. 6 shows the performance
comparison of the SNR estimate at speciﬁc frequencies of 1, 2,
and 3 kHz for the methods applied to the noisy speech signal in
Fig. 5(b). It was shown from the ﬁgure that the proposed method
gave an SNR estimate that was more similar to the true value
than the conventional single-microphone method. To quantify
the similarity, Table II compares the root mean square (RMS)
errors between the true and estimated SNR values at speciﬁc fre-
quencies from 500 Hz to 3 kHz at a step of 500 Hz. As shown in
the table, the proposed method achieved much smaller RMS er-
rors than the conventional method. These results imply that the
TABLE II
RMS ERROR BETWEEN TRUE AND ESTIMATED
SNR AT DIFFERENT FREQUENCIES
Fig. 7. Comparison of (a) SDR, (b) SIR, and (c) SAR values according to dif-
ferent approaches for all scenarios.
SNR estimate based on the DOA information from the dual-mi-
crophone signals can provide more reliable information for es-
timating the SNR.
Fig. 7 compares the SDR, SIR, and SAR values averaged over
all SNRs and RT60s of different methods according to different
scenarios. In this ﬁgure, we labeled no speech enhancement
as ‘None,’ and we compared the proposed dual-microphone
TNR and SNR-based methods with four different conventional
dual-microphone speech enhancement methods (SDB, GSC
followed by post-ﬁlter (GSC-PW), PEF, and angular spec-
trum-based masking (ASBM)).4 As shown in the ﬁgure, the
SAR values did not seem to be dependent on the scenario; how-
ever, the SDR and SIR values in one-noise mixture scenarios
(Cases 1, 2, and 3) seemed to be higher than those in two-noise
mixture scenarios (Cases 5 and 6). Note that the SDR values
were little varied according to the different dual-microphone
4Some speech samples can be found inhttp://hucom.gist.ac.kr/TASL-2014/
sample.html.


2214
IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 22, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014
Fig. 8. Conceptual diagram for a DOA error simulation.
methods in Case 4; this was because in Case 4 the target speech
and noise were in the same direction, which made it difﬁcult
to discriminate between the target and non-target signals using
DOA cues. These DOA cue ambiguities present a challenging
problem for our future work. In Cases 1 and 2, the proposed
method did not provide a higher SIR value than the conven-
tional methods. However, the proposed method achieved the
highest SDR value, which implies that a speech enhancement
system employing the proposed SNR estimation method could
provide a better speech enhancement performance than con-
ventional methods, since the SDR was an assessment measure
that represented the overall speech enhancement performance
[22]. Note that the proposed TNR-based method provided a
better SDR performance than SDB, GSC-PW, and PEF in all
scenarios except Case 4; however, its performance did not seem
to be better than that of ASBM or the proposed DOA-based
SNR methods.
As mentioned earlier, we assumed that the target DOA was
known a priori; however, in a real environment, the target DOA
estimation might not be robust, thus the performance against
the target DOA error was also investigated in an interference
speech environment. As depicted in Fig. 8, in order to simu-
late the DOA error, the clean speech signal from the left mi-
crophone was ﬁxed as the reference signal for measuring the
SDR over all DOA error conditions. Fig. 9 compares the SDR
values of a noisy target speech according to the target DOA
error, ranging from
to
, which denotes the relative dif-
ference to the true DOA value. It should be noted that the SDR
values were averaged over all SNRs. In the ﬁgure, the SDB pro-
vided nearly constant SDR values, regardless of the DOA error
under both one-noise mixture situations (Cases 1, 2, and 3) and
two-noise mixture situations (Cases 5 and 6). This was because
the SDB using a dual-microphone broadside array had almost
the same directional sensitivity over all the target directions of
errors. On the other hand, in terms of SDR values, the GSC-PW,
PEF, ASBM, and proposed TNR/SNR estimation methods pro-
vided the speech enhancement performance that was dependent
on the DOA error. In particular, it was shown that the best per-
formance of the proposed SNR estimation method had a DOA
error of around
, denoting an accurate target DOA estimate.
Note that although the proposed TNR and SNR methods pro-
vided the highest SDR values at DOA errors ranging from
to
, they achieved lower SDR values than the conventional
Fig. 9. Comparison of SDR averaged over all SNRs and RT60s for different
speech enhancement methods under DOA errors ranging from
to
;
(a) SDR values averaged over Cases 1, 2, and 3, (b) SDR values averaged over
Cases 5 and 6.
methods beyond this range. Nevertheless, the proposed method
was deemed more effective for speech enhancement than the
convention methods, because the conventional GCC or SRP ap-
proach for the DOA estimation exhibited a sufﬁciently reliable
localization performance in terms of allowable DOA errors for
the range of
to
.
Table III compares the relative improvements of the SDR
values of the noise-reduced signals over their corresponding
original noisy speech signals. The improved SDR were aver-
aged over the scenarios of Cases 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6, according to
the different approaches under various SNR and reverberation
conditions. It was shown from the table that the improved SDR
values of all the methods decreased when the reverberation
was severed (i.e., RT60 was increased). Among all compared
methods, SDB provided the lowest improvement in SDR values
for all RT60s, but the proposed TNR method provided more
highly improved SDR values than SDB, PEF, and GSC-PW,
despite its simplicity. Moreover, ASBM seemed to be the most
effective for speech enhancement in terms of SDR values
among the conventional methods. However, the proposed
DOA-based SNR estimation method yielded the highest im-
provement in SDR values among all the considered speech
enhancement approaches for all SNRs when RT60 is below
300 ms. Note here that the proposed DOA-based SNR method
outperformed the proposed DOA-based TNR method. This was
because the proposed DOA-based SNR method well utilized
spatial cues, even under reverberation conditions, while the
proposed TNR method was sensitive to the reverberation con-
ditions. Consequently, it could be concluded here that a speech
enhancement system employing the proposed DOA-based SNR
estimation method outperformed those using the conventional
and TNR-based estimation methods regardless of reverberation
conditions.
Table IV subsequently compares the improved SDR values of
the speech signals processed by the different speech enhance-
ment methods under three different noise conditions such as
factory, vacuum cleaner, and white noise [30]. It was shown


KIM AND KIM: DOA BASED SNR ESTIMATION FOR DUAL-MICROPHONE SPEECH ENHANCEMENT
2215
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF IMPROVED SDR VALUES ACCORDING TO DIFFERENT METHODS UNDER VARIOUS SNR AND REVERBERATION CONDITIONS
TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF IMPROVED SDR VALUES AVERAGED OVER LOW SNRS OF 0, 5, AND 10 dB (OR HIGH SNRS OF 15 AND 20 dB)
ACCORDING TO DIFFERENT METHODS UNDER VARIOUS NOISE TYPES
from the table that the proposed DOA-based SNR estimation
method yielded the most highly improved SDR values of all the
considered methods under each noise condition, which also out-
performed the proposed TNR-based method under all SNR and
RT60 conditions.
In addition to the SDR, the PESQ [23] score was measured
in order to compare the quality of the target speech recon-
structed by the different speech enhancement methods. Note
here that the simulation settings of the SDR measurements
were maintained in this evaluation. Table V compares the
averaged PESQ scores averaged over all RT60s according to all
scenarios. As shown in the table, ASBM provided higher PESQ
scores than the other conventional methods under all noise
conditions. However, the proposed method achieved higher
PESQ scores than ASBM. Consequently, it could be concluded
that the speech enhancement system employing the proposed
TABLE V
COMPARISON OF PESQ SCORES AVERAGED OVER LOW SNRS OF 0, 5, AND
10 dB (OR HIGH SNRS OF 15 AND 20 dB) ACCORDING TO DIFFERENT
METHODS UNDER VARIOUS NOISE TYPES


2216
IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 22, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014
DOA-based SNR method outperformed the conventional and
proposed TNR-based methods, regardless of the noise type.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new SNR estimation method
based on the phase differences for dual-microphone speech
enhancement. For this task, the DOA-based TNR was ﬁrst
estimated by using the phase difference between the dual-mi-
crophone signals, which was then utilized to estimate the
DOA-based SNR under target speech presence uncertainty.
Next, the estimated DOA-based SNR was incorporated into
a Wiener ﬁlter in order to obtain a spectral-gain attenuator.
To investigate the effect of the proposed method on the per-
formance of a speech enhancement system, test noisy speech
signals were artiﬁcially prepared to simulate interference
speech environments at different SNRs of 0, 5, 10, 15, and
20 dB under reverberant conditions (RT60s) of 0, 100, 200, and
300 ms. By using the test noisy speech signals, we evaluated the
speech enhancement performance of the proposed method in
terms of SDR, SIR, and SAR. Consequently, it was conﬁrmed
from SDR, SIR, and SAR comparisons that the Wiener ﬁlter
employing the proposed DOA-based SNR estimation method
outperformed the method that used a single-microphone Wiener
ﬁlter, in addition to the dual-microphone methods such as SDB,
GSC-PW, PEF, and ASBM under reverberant noise conditions.
It was also shown from PESQ comparison that the Wiener ﬁlter
using the proposed method provided a better speech quality
than the other speech enhancement systems under comparison.
APPENDIX I
List of Abbreviations and their Meanings
SNR
TNR
DOA
STSA
DD
T-F
SDP
ICA
BSS
PEF
SDR
SIR
SAR
PESQ
SDB
GSC
GSC-PW
ASBM
TDOA
GCC
SRP
PHAT
DSB
BM
LRT
ISM
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Target-to-Non-target directional signal Ratio
Direction-Of-Arrival
Short-Term Spectral Amplitude
Decision-Directed
Time-Frequency
Spatial Directivity Pattern
Independent Component Analysis
Blind Source Separation
Phase Error-based Filter
Source-to-Distortion Ratio
Source-to-Interference Ratio
Source-to-Artifacts Ratio
Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality
Super-Directive Beamformer
Generalized Sidelobe Canceller
GSC followed by a Post Wiener ﬁlter
Angular Spectrum-Based Masking
Time Difference-Of-Arrival
Generalized Cross-Correlation
Steered Response Power
Phase Transform
Delay-and-Sum Beamformer
Blocking Matrix
Log-likelihood Ratio Test
Image Source Method
APPENDIX II
TNR ESTIMATION BASED ON PHASE DIFFERENCE
In this Appendix, we derive (11) from (9) and (10). First,
is obtained by using the relationships of (9) and
(10) as
(26)
since
and
. Then, the proposed
TNR estimate
can be ﬁnally obtained
from (26) as
(27)
REFERENCES
[1] J. Benesty, S. Makino, and J. Chen, Speech Enhancement.
New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[2] S. J. Lee, B. O. Kang, H. Jung, Y. Lee, and H. S. Kim, “Statistical
model-based noise reduction approach for car interior applications to
speech recognition,” ETRI J., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 801–809, Oct. 2010.
[3] N. S. Kim and J.-H. Chang, “Spectral enhancement based on global
soft decision,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 108–110,
May 2000.
[4] P. M. Brandstein and D. Ward, Microphone Arrays.
New York, NY,
USA: Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[5] S. Araki, H. Sawada, R. Mukai, and S. Makino, “Underdetermined
blind sparse source separation of arbitrarily arranged multiple sensors,”
Signal Process., vol. 87, no. 8, pp. 1833–1847, Aug. 2007.
[6] N. Roman, D. L. Wang, and G. J. Brown, “Speech segregation based
on sound localization,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 114, no. 4, pp.
2236–2252, Oct. 2003.
[7] O. Yilmaz and S. Rickard, “Blind separation of speech mixtures via
time-frequency masking,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 7,
pp. 1830–1847, Jul. 2004.
[8] M. Aoki, M. Okamoto, S. Aoki, H. Matsui, T. Sakurai, and Y. Kaneda,
“Sound source segregation based on estimating incident angle of
each frequency component of input signals acquired by multiple
microphones,” Acoust. Sci. Technol., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 149–157, May
2001.
[9] B. Loesch and B. Yang, “Online blind source separation based on time-
frequency sparseness,” in Proc. ICASSP, Taipei, Taiwan, Apr. 2009,
pp. 117–120.
[10] S. Araki, S. Makino, H. Sawada, and R. Mukai, “Reducing musical
noise by a ﬁne-shift overlap-and-add method applied to source separa-
tion using a time frequency mask,” in Proc. ICASSP, Philadelphia, PA,
USA, Mar. 2005, vol. 3, pp. 81–84.
[11] J. H. Park, J. S. Yoon, and H. K. Kim, “HMM-based mask estimation
for a speech recognition front-end using computational auditory scene
analysis,” IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. E91-D, no. 9, pp. 2360–2364,
Sep. 2008.


KIM AND KIM: DOA BASED SNR ESTIMATION FOR DUAL-MICROPHONE SPEECH ENHANCEMENT
2217
[12] J. Barker, L. Josifovski, M. Cooke, and P. Green, “Soft decisions in
missing data techniques for robust automatic speech recognition,” in
Proc. ICSLP, Beijing, China, Oct. 2000, vol. 1, pp. 373–376.
[13] S. Srinivasan, N. Roman, and D. Wang, “Binary and ratio time-fre-
quency masks for robust speech recognition,” Speech Commun., vol.
48, no. 11, pp. 1486–1501, Nov. 2006.
[14] B. D. van Veen and K. M. Buckley, “Beamforming: A versatile ap-
proach to spatial ﬁltering,” IEEE ASSP Mag., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 4–24,
Apr. 1988.
[15] S. Dolco and M. Moonen, “Superdirective beamforming robust against
microphone mismatch,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process.,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 617–631, Feb. 2007.
[16] S. Han, J. Hong, S. Jeong, and M. Hahn, “Probabilistic adaption mode
control algorithm for GSC-based noise reduction,” IEICE Trans.
Fundam. Electron., Commun., Comput. Sci., vol. E93-A, no. 3, pp.
627–630, Mar. 2010.
[17] C. Marro, Y. Mahieux, and K. U. Simmer, “Analysis of noise reduc-
tion and dereverberation techniques based on microphone arrays with
postﬁltering,” IEEE Trans. Speech Audio Process., vol. 6, no. 3, pp.
240–259, May 1998.
[18] M. S. Pedersen, J. Larsen, U. Kjems, and L. C. Parra, “A survey of
convolutive blind source separation methods,” in Springer Handbook
of Speech, J. Benesty, Y. Huang, and M. Sondhi, Eds.
New York, NY,
USA: Springer, Nov. 2007, pp. 1–34.
[19] P. Aarabi and G. Shi, “Phase-based dual-microphone robust speech
enhancement,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern.-Part B: Cybern., vol.
34, no. 4, pp. 1763–1773, Aug. 2004.
[20] R. Mukai, H. Sawada, S. Araki, and S. Makino, “Blind source sepa-
ration for moving speech signals using blockwise ICA and residual
crosstalk subtraction,” IEICE Trans. Fundam. Electron., Commun.,
Comput. Sci., vol. E87-A, no. 8, pp. 1941–1948, Aug. 2004.
[21] S. M. Kim and H. K. Kim, “Target-to-non-target directional ratio es-
timation based on dual-microphone phase differences for target-direc-
tional speech enhancement,” in Proc. Interspeech, Lyon, France, Aug.
2013, pp. 3254–3258.
[22] R. Gribonval, C. Févotte, and E. Vincent, “Performance measurement
in blind audio source separation,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang.
Process., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1462–1469, Jul. 2006.
[23] “Perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ), and objective method
for end-to-end speech quality assessment of narrowband telephone net-
works and speech coders,” ITU-T Recommendation P.862, Feb. 2001.
[24] C. Blandin, A. Ozerov, and E. Vincent, “Multi-source TDOA estima-
tion in reverberant audio using angular spectra and clustering,” Signal
Process., vol. 92, no. 8, pp. 1950–1960, Aug. 2012.
[25] S. M. Kim and H. K. Kim, “Hybrid probabilistic adaptation mode
controller for generalized sidelobe canceller-based target-directional
speech enhancement,” in Proc. ICASSP, Prague, Czech Republic,
May 2011, pp. 2532–2535.
[26] J. Sohn, N. S. Kim, and W. Sung, “A statistical model-based voice
activity detection,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–3,
Jan. 1999.
[27] E. A. Lehmann and A. M. Johansson, “Prediction of energy decay in
room impulse responses simulated with an image-source model,” J.
Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 124, no. 1, pp. 269–277, Jul. 2008.
[28] E. A. Lehmann and A. M. Johansson, “Diffuse reverberation model for
efﬁcient image-source simulation of room impulse responses,” IEEE
Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1429–1439,
Aug. 2010.
[29] J. S. Garofolo, L. F. Lamel, W. M. Fisher, J. G. Fiscus, D. S. Pallett, N.
L. Dahlgren, and V. Zue, TIMIT Acoustic-Phonetic Continuous Speech
Corpus.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: Linguistic Data Consortium, 1993.
[30] A. Varga, H. J. M. Steenneken, M. Tomilson, and D. Jones, “The
NOISEX–92 study on the effect of additive noise on automatic speech
recognition,” Documentation on the NOISEX–92 CD–ROMs, Jun.
1992.
Seon Man Kim is a researcher at the Institute of
Sound and Vibration Research (ISVR), Univer-
sity of Southampton. He received a B.S. degree
in mechanical design engineering from Chonbuk
National University, Korea, in 2003 and an M.S.
degree in mechatronics engineering from Gwangju
Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Korea,
in 2005. From 2005 to 2007, he was a researcher
at the Samsung Reciprocating Compressor RND
Group, Gwangju, Korea. He received a Ph.D. degree
in information and communications engineering
from GIST in 2013. His current research interests involve audio and speech
signal processing using multi-microphone techniques, non-negative matrix
factorization, and auditory image models.
Hong Kook Kim (M’99–SM’01) received a B.S. de-
gree in control and instrumentation engineering from
Seoul National University, Korea, in 1988. He then
received both M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical en-
gineering from the Korea Advanced Institute of Sci-
ence and Technology (KAIST), Korea in 1990 and
1994, respectively. He was a senior researcher at the
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT),
Korea, from 1990 to 1998. During 1998–2003, he
was a senior technical staff member with the Voice
Enabled Services Research Lab at AT&T Labs-Re-
search, Florham Park, New Jersey. Since August 2003, he has been with the
School of Information and Communications at Gwangju Institute of Science
and Technology (GIST), Gwangju, Korea, as a Professor. From July 2014, he
is a visiting professor at the City University of New York, New York, USA. He
is currently an IEEE Senior Member and an afﬁliate member of IEEE Speech
and Language Technical Committee. Since 2012, he has served as an editorial
committee member and area editor of Digital Signal Processing. His current
research interests include large vocabulary speech recognition, audio coding
and speech/audio source separation, and embedded algorithms and solutions for
speech and audio processing for handheld devices.
