Author Manuscript       HHS Public Access

Author Manuscript          Author manuscript

Author Manuscript            IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021
                              July 13.
Author Manuscript
                   Published in final edited form as:
                    IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. 2019 July ; 27(7): 1179-1188. doi:10.1109/
                    taslp.2019.2913512.

                   A New Framework for CNN-Based Speech Enhancement in the
                   Time Domain

                   Ashutosh Pandey [Student Member, IEEE],
                   Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
                   43210 USA

                   DeLiang Wang [Fellow, IEEE]
                   Department of Computer Science and Engineering and the Center for Cognitive and Brain
                   Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

                   Abstract

                        This paper proposes a new learning mechanism for a fully convolutional neural network (CNN) to
                        address speech enhancement in the time domain. The CNN takes as input the time frames of noisy
                        utterance and outputs the time frames of the enhanced utterance. At the training time, we add an
                        extra operation that converts the time domain to the frequency domain. This conversion
                        corresponds to simple matrix multiplication, and is hence differentiable implying that a frequency
                        domain loss can be used for training in the time domain. We use mean absolute error loss between
                        the enhanced short-time Fourier transform (STFT) magnitude and the clean STFT magnitude to
                        train the CNN. This way, the model can exploit the domain knowledge of converting a signal to
                        the frequency domain for analysis. Moreover, this approach avoids the well-known invalid STFT
                        problem since the proposed CNN operates in the time domain. Experimental results demonstrate
                        that the proposed method substantially outperforms the other methods of speech enhancement.
                        The proposed method is easy to implement and applicable to related speech processing tasks that
                        require time-frequency masking or spectral mapping.

                   Keywords
                        Speech enhancement; fully convolutional neural network; time domain enhancement; deep
                        learning; mean absolute error

                   I. Introduction

                                     SPEECH enhancement is the task of removing or attenuating additive noise from a speech
                                     signal, and it is generally concerned with improving the intelligibility and quality of
                                     degraded speech. Speech enhancement is employed as a preprocessor in many applications
                                     such as robust automatic speech recognition, teleconferencing and hearing aids design. The
                                     purpose of monaural (single-channel) speech enhancement is to provide a versatile and cost-
                                     efficient approach to the problem that utilizes recordings from only a single microphone.

                   Corresponding author: Ashutosh Pandey. pandey.99@osu.edu.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 2

Author Manuscript                   Single-channel speech enhancement is considered a very challenging problem especially at
                                    low signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). This study focuses on single-channel speech enhancement
Author Manuscript                   in the time domain.

Author Manuscript                   Traditional monaural speech enhancement approaches include statistical enhancement
                                    methods [1] and computational auditory scene analysis [2]. In the last few years, supervised
Author Manuscript                   methods for speech enhancement using deep neural networks (DNNs) have become the
                                    mainstream [3]. Among the most popular deep learning methods are denoising autoencoders
                                    [4], feedforward neural networks [5], [6], and CNNs [7]-[9].

                                    Most frequently employed methods for supervised speech enhancement use T-F masking or
                                    spectral mapping [3]. Both of these approaches reconstruct the speech signal in the time
                                    domain from the frequency domain using the phase of the noisy signal. It means that the
                                    learning machine learns a mapping in the frequency domain but the task of going from the
                                    frequency domain to the time domain is not subject to the learning process. Integrating the
                                    domain knowledge of going from the frequency domain to the time domain, or the other way
                                    around, could be helpful for the core task of speech enhancement. A similar approach of
                                    incorporating such domain knowledge inside the network is found to be useful in [10],
                                    which employs a time-domain loss for T-F masking. Recently in [11], the authors integrate a
                                    fixed number of steps of the iterative Multiple Input Spectrogram Inversion (MISI)
                                    algorithm [12] inside DNN, which is found to be helpful for the speaker separation task.

                                    We design a fully convolutional neural network that takes as input the noisy speech signal in
                                    the time domain and outputs the enhanced speech signal in the time domain. One way to
                                    train this network is to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) or the MAE loss between
                                    the clean speech signal and the enhanced speech signal [8], [9]. However, our experiments
                                    show that, using a time domain loss, some of the phonetic information in the estimated
                                    speech is distorted probably because the underlying phones are difficult to distinguish from
                                    the background noise. Also, using a loss function in the time domain does not produce a
                                    good speech quality. So, we believe that it is important to use a frequency domain loss,
                                    which can discriminate speech sounds from nonspeech noises and produce speech with high
                                    quality.

                                    Motivated by the above considerations, we propose to add an extra operation in the model at
                                    the training time that converts the estimated speech signal in the time domain to the
                                    frequency domain. The conversion from the time domain to the frequency domain is
                                    differentiable, so a loss in the frequency domain can be used to train a network in the time
                                    domain. We propose to use the MAE loss between the clean STFT magnitude and the
                                    estimated STFT magnitude.

                                    The two approaches proposed in [10], [11] employ a DNN in the frequency domain and use
                                    a loss function in the time domain to train the DNN. However, these methods use the noisy
                                    phase to reconstruct a time domain signal, and may suffer from the well-known invalid
                                    STFT problem [13]. In our approach, a model is employed in the time domain and trained
                                    using a loss function in the frequency domain, so the generated signal is always a valid
                                    signal and we do not need to use the phase of the noisy signal. The neural network learns a

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 3

Author Manuscript                   phase structure itself in the process of optimizing the proposed loss. We show in Section VI
                                    that the learned phase is better than the noisy phase.
Author Manuscript
                                    Other researchers have explored speech enhancement in the time domain using deep
                                    learning. In [9], authors explore CNNs for speech enhancement and claim that fully
                                    connected layers inside a DNN are not suitable for the time domain enhancement and
                                    instead propose to use a fully-convolutional neural network. Similar to our work, a time
                                    domain network has been proposed using a loss based on a short-term objective
                                    intelligibility metric [14]. In [8], authors propose a generative adversarial network [15] for
                                    speech enhancement in which the generator is an autoencoder based fully-convolutional
                                    network that is trained with the help of a discriminator. Recently, the Bayesian wavenet [16]
                                    has been explored for speech enhancement followed by [17], which makes the wavenet [18]
                                    faster and uses a discriminative approach rather than a generative approach. Very recently, a
                                    fully convolutional network is proposed for speaker separation in the time domain [19] and it
                                    is trained using a loss based on scale-invariant signal-to-noise ratio (SI-SNR).

                                    The work presented in this paper is an extension of our preliminary work in [20]. Here, we
                                    present more extensive experiments, provide a justification for the observed behavior, and
                                    evaluate the proposed model in a speaker- and noise-independent way. The rest of the paper
                                    is organized as follows. In the next Section, we describe the method to compute a frequency
                                    domain loss for a CNN in the time domain. Section III explains the details about the model
                                    architecture. In Section IV, we briefly describe the invalid STFT problem. Experiments and
                                    comparisons are described in Sections V and VI. Section VII concludes the paper.

Author Manuscript  II. Frequency Domain Loss Function

                                    Given a real-valued vector xt of size N in the time domain, we can convert it to the
                                     frequency domain by multiplying it with a complex-valued discrete Fourier transform (DFT)
                                     matrix D using the following equation

                                    xf = Dxt                                                                                        (1)

                                    where xf is the DFT of xt and D is of size N × N. Since xt is real-valued, the relation in (1)
                                    can be rewritten as

                                    xf = (Dr + iDi)xt = Drxt + iDixt                                                                (2)

Author Manuscript                   where Dr and Di are real-valued matrices formed by taking the element-wise real and
                                    imaginary part of D and i denotes the imaginary unit. This relation can be separated into two
                                    Equations involving only real-valued vectors as given in the following Equation.

                                    xfr = Drxt (3)
                                    xfi = Dixt

                                    Here, xfr and xfi are real-valued vectors formed by taking element-wise real and imaginary
                                    part of xf. A frequency domain loss can thus be defined using xfr and xfi. One such loss
                                    defined as the average of the MSE losses on the real and imaginary part of xf is:

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 4

Author Manuscript                   1N 2
                                    L(xf, xf) =  ((xfr(n) - xfr(n))
                                    Nn=1                                                                        (4)

                                    + (xfi(n) - xfi(n))2)

                                    where xf is an estimate of xf. x(n) denotes the nth component of x. It should be noted that
                                    this loss function has both magnitude and phase because it uses the real as well as the
                                    imaginary part. However, we find that using both the magnitude and the phase does not give
                                    as good performance as using only the magnitude. So, we use the following loss function
                                    defined using only the magnitudes.

                                    1N
                                    L(xf, xf) =   (  xfr(n)  +  xfi(n)  )
Author Manuscript                   Nn=1                                                                        (5)

                                    - (  xfr(n)  +  xfi(n)  ) 

                                    This loss can also be described as the MAE loss between the estimated STFT magnitude and
                                    the clean STFT magnitude when the magnitude of a complex number is defined using the L1
                                    norm. We also compare the proposed loss function with an L2 loss defined as:

                                    1N    2                2
                                    L(xf, xf) =   xfr(n) + xfi(n) + 
                                    Nn=1                                                                        (6)

                                    - xfr(n)2 + xfi(n)2 +  

Author Manuscript                   Here,  is a small positive constant added to stabilize the training. Our use of the MAE loss
                                    is partly motivated by a recent observation that the MAE loss works better in terms of
Author Manuscript                   objective quality scores when a spectral mapping based DNN is trained [21]. In the present
                                    study we have confirmed that the MAE loss performs better than the MSE loss for objective
                                    intelligibility and quality.

                                    Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram for computing a frequency domain loss from enhanced
                                    time domain frames. The proposed model operates on the frame size of 2048 samples,
                                    meaning that it takes as input a frame of duration 128 ms with the sampling frequency of 16
                                    kHz, and outputs a frame of the same length. All the enhanced frames of an utterance at the
                                    network output are combined using the overlap-and-add (OLA) method to obtain the
                                    enhanced utterance. A frame shift of 256 samples is used for OLA. The enhanced utterance
                                    is then divided into frames of size 512. The obtained frames are multiplied by the Hamming
                                    window and then separately with two matrices Dr and Di, each of size 512 × 512 as defined
                                    in Equation (2). The matrix multiplication gives the real and imaginary part of the STFT.
                                    Next, the real and imaginary part of the STFT are combined to get the STFT magnitude. The
                                    computed STFT magnitude is compared with the clean STFT magnitude to obtain a
                                    frequency domain loss.

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 5

Author Manuscript  III. Model Architecture

                                     We use a fully convolutional neural network that is comprised of a series of convolutional
                                     and deconvolutional layers. We first describe the convolution and deconvolution operation
                                     and then the proposed model.

                   A. Convolution

                                     Formally, a 1-D discrete convolution operator *, which convolves signal f with kernel k of
                                    size 2m + 1 and with stride r, is defined as

                                    (f  k)(p) =  f(s)k(t)                                                                         (7)
                                    s + t = (r × p)

Author Manuscript                   where p, s   and t  [ - m, m]  . Here,  denotes the set of integers. A strided
                                    convolution used in this work is a convolution meant to reduce the size at the output by
                                    sliding the kernel over the input signal with a step greater than one. For example, given an
                                    input of length 2N, a kernel of size 2m + 1 and zero padding of size m on both sides of the
                                    input, a convolution with stride 2 will produce an output of size N. Hence the input of size
                                    2N is effectively downsampled to an output of size N.

Author Manuscript  B. Deconvolution

                                    A deconvolution layer [22], also known as transposed convolution, is a convolution meant to
                                    increase the size at the output. For a deconvolution with stride length r, r - 1 zeroes are first
                                     inserted between the consecutive samples of the input signal. Then it is zero padded on both
                                    sides with an appropriate amount so that the convolution with a kernel of size k and stride 1
                                    produces the output of desired size. For example, given an input of length N, kernel of size
                                    (2m + 1), and stride of 2, first, one zero will be inserted between the consecutive samples of
                                    the input, giving a signal of length 2N - 1. Then the signal will be zero-padded on left and
                                    right by m and m + 1 respectively to get the signal of length 2N + 2m. After this, a
                                    convolution with a filter of size 2m + 1 will produce an output of size 2N. Hence the input of
                                    size N is effectively upsampled to an output of size 2N.

Author Manuscript  C. Proposed Model

                                     We use an autoencoder based fully convolutional neural network with skip connections first
                                     proposed for time domain speech enhancement in [8], which was adopted from U-Net [23].
                                     The schematic diagram of the proposed model is shown in Fig. 2, which illustrates the
                                     processing of one frame. The first layer of the encoder is a convolutional layer that increases
                                     the number of channels from 1 to 64. Each of the next eight layers successively reduces the
                                     dimension of the input signal to half using convolutions with a stride of 2, while either
                                     doubling or maintaining the number of channels. The final output of the encoder is of size 8
                                     with 256 channels. The decoder mirrors the encoder, consisting of a series of eight
                                     deconvolutional layers [22] with a stride of 2 that double the dimension of its input making
                                     the number of channels the same as in the corresponding symmetric layer of the encoder.
                                     The output of each layer in the decoder is concatenated with the output from the
                                     corresponding symmetric layer of the encoder along the channel axis.

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 6

Author Manuscript                   The skip connections are included because a signal can not be well reconstructed from the
                                    final output of the encoder as it has a much reduced dimension compared to the input and is
Author Manuscript                   a bottleneck. Furthermore, the skip connections help to provide gradients to the layers close
                                    to the input layer and avoid the vanishing gradient problem [24]. The final output layer is a
                                    simple convolutional layer which reduces the number of channels from 64 to 1. Each layer
                                    in the network uses the activation of parametric ReLU non-linearity [25] except for the
                                    output layer which uses the Tanh. A dropout [26] rate of 0.2 is applied at every 3 layers. To
                                    summarize, the dimensionality of the outputs from the successive layers in the proposed
                                    network is 2048 × 1 (input), 2048 × 64, 1024 × 64, 512 × 64, 256 × 128, 128 × 128, 64 ×
                                    128, 32 × 256, 16 × 256, 8 × 256, 16 × 512, 32 × 512, 64 × 256, 128 × 256, 256 × 256, 512
                                    × 128, 1024 × 128, 2048 × 128, 2048 × 1 (output).

                                    For the speaker- and noise-independent model trained on the WSJ0 SI-84 dataset [27] (see
                                    Section V-A), we use a deeper network that takes as input a frame of size 16384 samples.
                                    The model mentioned above gives good performance for this task but is not able to improve
                                    the state-of-the-art performance. For the enhancement task on this dataset, the importance of
                                    future and past context was first established in [28]. We also observe a considerable
                                    performance improvement when the context is increased by increasing the frame size. The
                                    dimensionality of the successive layers in the network used for this task is 16384 × 1 (input),
                                    16384 × 32, 8192 × 32, 4096 × 32, 2048 × 64, 1024 × 64, 512 × 64, 256 × 128, 128 × 128,
                                    64 × 128, 32 × 256, 16 × 256, 8 × 256, 16 × 512, 32 × 512, 64 × 256, 128 × 256, 256 × 256,
                                    512 × 128, 1024 × 128, 2048 × 128, 4096 × 64, 8192 × 64, 16384 × 64 (output).

Author Manuscript  IV. Invalid Short-Time Fourier Transform

                                     The STFT of a signal is obtained by taking the DFT of overlapped frames of a signal. The
                                     overlap between consecutive frames causes the adjacent frames to have common samples at
                                     the boundary of frames. This correlation between adjacent frames appears in the frequency
                                     domain as well and results in a certain relationship between the STFT magnitude and the
                                     STFT phase. This relationship needs to be maintained to reconstruct the original signal in
                                     the time domain. In [13], the authors show that not all 2-dimensional complex-valued signals
                                    correspond to a valid STFT. A 2-dimensional complex-valued signal, X (m, k) is a valid
                                     STFT if and only if the following holds.

                                    STFT(ISTFT(X(m, k))) = X(m, k)                                                               (8)

Author Manuscript                   Here, ISTFT denotes inverse STFT, m frame number, and k is frequency index. An STFT
                                    obtained by taking the STFT of a real signal in the time domain is always a valid STFT. It
                                    means that given a real signal x(t) in the time domain, the following relations will always
                                    hold.

                                    ISTFT(STFT(x(t))) = x(t)                                                                     (9)
                                    STFT(ISTFT(STFT(x(t)))) = STFT(x(t))

                                    The problem arises when the STFT magnitude of a given real or the STFT phase of the
                                    signal are altered separately. In such a case, the required relationship between the STFT

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 7

Author Manuscript                   magnitude and STFT phase is not guaranteed, and Equation (6) may not hold. In the
                                    frequency domain speech enhancement, popular approaches are T-F masking and spectral
Author Manuscript                   mapping. Both of these methods require using the STFT phase of the noisy speech with
                                    enhanced STFT magnitude to reconstruct a time domain signal. The combination of the
Author Manuscript                   noisy phase with the enhanced magnitude of STFT is unlikely a valid STFT, as recently
                                    demonstrated in [29]. Invalid STFT causes unpleasant signal distortions. To deal with this
                                    problem, an iterative method has been proposed to get a signal in the time domain which
                                    produces the STFT magnitude close to the enhanced STFT magnitude while maintaining the
                                    valid STFT [13].

                                    The proposed framework can be thought of as a supervised way of resolving the invalid
                                    STFT problem by a CNN, which produces a speech signal in the time domain but is trained
                                    with a loss function which minimizes the distance measured in terms of the STFT
                                    magnitudes.

                                    The proposed model generates consecutive frames one by one and combines them using the
                                    OLA method as we find that OLA is better than a simple concatenation. Even though we use
                                    a loss function based on the magnitude of a valid STFT at the training time, this does not
                                    guarantee that generated consecutive frames will have matching samples at the boundary.
                                    But we use a frame size of 128 ms so that, even though the analysis window size is 32 ms,
                                    the validity of signal is guaranteed over the duration of 128 ms. The proposed model does
                                    not guarantee the whole utterance to be a valid signal. The simple concatenation of
                                    consecutive frames would give a valid signal, but it exhibits boundary discontinuity, giving
                                    worse objective scores than OLA. A different approach to generate a valid signal at the
                                    utterance level is to design a model that produces one sample at a time. But, such models
                                    based on deep learning are very slow and have not been established for speech enhancement.
                                    One such example is wavenet [18], which has been explored for denoising in [16] and [17].
                                    The proposed model in [16] is very slow, and in [17], it operates at the frame level for
                                    efficiency and hence suffers from the same problem.

Author Manuscript  V. Experimental Settings

                   A. Datasets

                                     In our first set of experiments, we evaluate and analyze the proposed framework on the
                                     TIMIT dataset [30] which consists of utterances from many male and female speakers. We
                                     use 2000 randomly chosen utterances from the TIMIT training set as the training utterances.
                                     The TIMIT core test set consisting of 192 utterances is used as the test set. We evaluate
                                     models for the noise-dependent and noise-independent case. Five noise-dependent models
                                     are trained on the following five noises: babble, factory1, oproom, engine, and speech-
                                     shaped noise (SSN). A single noise-independent model is trained using the five noises
                                     mentioned above and evaluated on two untrained noises: factory2 and tank. All the noises
                                     except SSN are from the NOISEX [31] dataset. All noises are around 4 minutes long. The
                                     training set is created by mixing random cuts from the first half of noises at the SNRs of -5
                                     dB and 0 dB. The test set is created by adding random cuts from the second half of the
                                     noises at the SNRs of -5 dB, 0 dB, and 5 dB. Here, 5 dB is an untrained SNR condition that

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 8

Author Manuscript                   is used to asses SNR generalization of the trained models. The datasets are similar to the
                                    ones used in [21], [32].
Author Manuscript
                                    Further, we evaluate the proposed framework in a speaker-dependent way on the IEEE
Author Manuscript                   database[33]. This experiment is performed to evaluate if the proposed framework scales
                                    well for untrained noises after training using a large number of noises. The IEEE database
                                    consists of 720 utterances of a single male speaker. We create a large training set by mixing
                                    randomly selected 560 IEEE sentences with 10000 non-speech sounds from a sound-effect
                                    library (available at www.sound-ideas.com). The remaining 160 utterances are used as test
                                    utterances. The training set consists of 640000 noisy utterances. To create a training
                                    utterance an IEEE sentence is first randomly selected from the 560 training utterances. The
                                    selected utterance is then mixed at a fixed SNR of -2 dB with a random segment of a
                                    randomly selected noise. The total duration of the training noises is around 125 hours, and
                                    that of the training mixtures is around 380 hours. The test set is created by mixing the
                                    selected 160 test sentences with babble and cafeteria noise from the Auditec CD (available
                                    at http://www.auditec.com) at the SNRs of -5 dB, -2 dB, 0 dB and 5 dB. Here, -5 dB, 0 dB
                                    and 5 dB are untrained SNRs. The training and test set used in this experiment are similar to
                                    the ones used in [34], hence facilitating a direct comparison.

                                    We also evaluate the proposed framework on the WSJ0 SI-84 dataset [27] that consists of
                                    7138 utterances from 83 speakers. A speaker- and noise-independent model is trained using
                                    a large training set. Seventy-seven speakers are selected to produce training utterances. The
                                    test set is created from the utterances of 6 speakers that are not included in the training set.
                                    The training and test mixtures are generated in the same manner as described in the previous
                                    paragraph. The only difference is that, in this experiment, 320000 utterances are generated at
                                    five SNRs of -5 dB, -4 dB, -3 dB, -2 dB, -1 dB. An utterance, a noise, and an SNR value
                                    are randomly selected first. Then the selected utterance is mixed with a random cut from the
                                    selected noise at the selected SNR. The SNRs used for evaluation are -5 dB, 0 dB and 5 dB.
                                    The training and the test set for this experiment are the same as in [35], again facilitating
                                    quantitative comparisons.

Author Manuscript  B. System Setup

                                     As described in the last subsection, we perform training on three datasets: TIMIT, IEEE, and
                                     WSJ0 SI-84. All the utterances are resampled to 16 kHz. The noisy and the clean utterances
                                     are normalized to the value range [-1, 1], and frames are extracted from the normalized
                                     utterances. A frame size of 2048 samples (128 ms) is used for the experiments on the TMIT
                                     and IEEE databases. A frame size of 16384 samples is used, as mentioned in Section III, for
                                     the experiments on WSJ0 SI-84. The frame shift to generate training frames is half of the
                                     frame size for IEEE and WSJ0 and 256 samples for the experiments on TIMIT.

                                     A filter size of 11 is used. All the weights in CNNs are initialized using the Xavier initializer
                                     with normally distributed random initialization [36]. The Adam optimizer [37] is used for
                                     SGD (stochastic gradient descent) based optimization with a batch size of 4 utterances. The
                                     shorter utterances in a batch are zero padded to match the size of the longest utterance. The
                                     loss value computed over the zero padded region is ignored for gradient computation. The
                                     learning rate is set to 0.0002.

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 9

Author Manuscript                   The major difference between the architecture of the generator in SEGAN [8] and the
                                    architecture of our model is that the input frame size to SEGAN is equal to 16384 samples
                                    whereas our input frame size is 2048 samples. The filter size in SEGAN is 31 as compared
                                    to 11 in our model. The total number of parameters in the SEGAN model is around 58
                                    million whereas our model has around 6.4 million parameters.

Author Manuscript  C. Baseline Models

Author Manuscript                    To compare the noise-dependent and noise-independent models trained on the TIMIT
                                     dataset, we use three baseline models. First, we train a DNN model using the MAE loss to
                                     estimate the ideal ratio mask (IRM) [32]. This model is a 3-layered fully connected DNN
                                     that takes as input the noisy STFT magnitudes of five consecutive frames (centered at the
                                     current frame) concatenated together and outputs the IRM of the corresponding five frames
                                     together. Multiple predictions of the IRM are averaged. The second baseline is the SEGAN
                                     model [8]. In the method in [8], the generator of the generative adversarial network (GAN)
                                     [15] is trained using two loss functions; adversarial loss and MAE loss in the time domain.
                                     We train two versions of this model. The first is trained using both the loss functions,
                                     adversarial loss and the MAE loss as in the original paper. We call this model SEGAN. The
                                     second is trained using only the loss on time domain samples. We call this model SEGAN-T
                                     in our experiments.

                                     The model trained on the IEEE dataset is compared with a five-layered DNN model
                                     proposed in [34] which uses the same dataset as in our work, and generates the training and
                                     test mixtures in the same manner. The input to their DNN is the concatenation of the power

                                            1

                                     ( 15) compressed cochleagram of 23 consecutive frames (centered at the current frame) of
                                     noisy speech. The output of the DNN is the IRM of 5 consecutive frames. Multiple
                                     predictions of the IRM are also averaged. Each hidden layer has 2048 units.

                                     Our speaker- and noise-independent model trained on WSJ0 SI-84 dataset is compared with
                                     a recently proposed model [35]. This gated residual network (GRN) model is a 62-layer
                                     deep fully convolutional network with residual connections. It takes as input the spectrogram
                                     of the whole utterance at once and outputs the phase-sensitive mask (PSM) [38] of the whole
                                     utterance. The layers in this model are comprised of dilated convolutional layers having
                                     gated linear units with an exponentially increasing rate of dilation. This model has the state-
                                     of-the-art performance for this speaker- and noise-independent enhancement task.

Author Manuscript  D. Evaluation Metrics and Comparisons

                                     In our experiments, models are compared using short-term objective intelligibility (STOI)
                                     [39], perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ) [40], and scale-invariant signal-to-
                                     distortion ratio (SI-SDR) [41] scores, all of which represent the standard metrics for speech
                                     enhancement. STOI has a typical value range from 0 to 1, which can be roughly interpreted
                                     as percent correct. PESQ values range from -0.5 to 4.5.

                                     All the time domain models are compared for both the MAE loss and the MSE loss training.
                                     For the experiments on the TIMIT dataset, the first comparison is done between the baseline
                                     models and the proposed model trained using different loss functions. The proposed model

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 10

Author Manuscript                   can be trained using a loss in the time domain or different types of loss in the frequency
                                    domain. For a frequency domain loss, two possible loss functions are a loss on both the real
Author Manuscript                   and the imaginary part of STFT and a loss on the STFT magnitude. We call our model
                                    autoencoder convolutional neural network (AECNN). The corresponding abbreviated names
Author Manuscript                   for our models trained using different loss functions are AECNN-T for using a loss on time
                                    domain samples, AECNN-RI for using a loss on both the real and the imaginary part of the
                                    STFT, and AECNN-SM for using a loss on STFT magnitudes. AECNN-SM1 denotes the
                                    loss defined on L1 norm and AECNN-SM2 denotes the loss defined on L2 norm of STFT
                                    coefficients.

                                    Note that a model trained using a loss in the time domain or a loss on both the real and the
                                    imaginary part of the STFT utilizes phase information during training and hence training is
                                    supposed to learn both the magnitude and the phase. The model proposed in [42] also uses a
                                    loss on the real and imaginary part of the STFT but it operates in the frequency domain and
                                    thus is fundamentally different from our approach.

                                    AECNN-SM trains a given model using a loss on STFT magnitudes, with no phase used at
                                    the training time. With the proposed time-domain enhancement, however, AECNN learns a
                                    phase structure itself. It is interesting to explore whether the learned phase is better than the
                                    mixture phase. We compare the learned phase with the mixture phase and the clean phase.
                                    First, we combine the STFT magnitude of the noisy utterance with two different kinds of
                                    phase: the learned phase and the clean phase. These are named MIX-SM and MIX-CLN
                                    respectively. Second, we combine the STFT magnitude predicted by the baseline IRM
                                    estimator with three kinds of phase: the noisy phase, the learned phase, and the clean phase.
                                    They are named IRM-MIX, IRM-SM, and IRM-CLN respectively. The STOI, PESQ and SI-
                                    SDR scores are compared at the SNRs of -5, 0, and 5 dB.

Author Manuscript  VI. Results and Discussions

                                     First, we present the results of noise-dependent models trained on the TIMIT dataset. Table I
                                     lists the average results over all the five noises at -5 dB, 0 dB, and 5 dB SNR. We divide our
                                     loss functions into two categories, those with phase, i.e., AECNN-T, SEGAN-T or AECNN-
                                     RI, and those without phase, i.e., AECNN-SM1 and AECNN-SM2. We observe that the
                                     models trained with a loss with phase perform better using MSE whereas the models trained
                                     with a loss without phase perform better using MAE. The SEGAN-T, AECNN-T, and
                                     AECNN-RI, have better STOI and SI-SDR scores with MAE but significantly worse PESQ.
                                     AECNN-SM1 and AECNN-SM2 produce better scores with the MAE loss. AECNN-SM1
                                     and AECNN-SM2 have similar STOI and PESQ scores but AECNN-SM1 is consistently
                                     better in terms of SI-SDR.

                                     Next, we observe that AECNN-T is significantly better than SEGAN-T and SEGAN,
                                     suggesting that the AECNN architecture is better than SEGAN for speech enhancement in
                                     the time domain. Additionally, the time domain models are much better than the baseline
                                     IRM based DNN model. The proposed AECNN-SM1 is significantly better in terms of
                                     STOI and PESQ compared to the AECNN-RI with MSE. AECNN-RI is marginally better in
                                     terms of SI-SDR. Note that the SI-SDR of AECNN-RI with MAE is better than AECNN-

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 11

Author Manuscript                   SM1, but its PESQ score is very low, implying that the AECNN-SM1 is better as it
                                    substantially improves PESQ while maintaining SI-SDR. In summary, the proposed
Author Manuscript                   AECNN-SM1 is the best in terms of STOI and PESQ, whereas AECNN-RI is the best for
                                    SI-SDR.
Author Manuscript
                                    A similar performance profile is observed for the noise-independent models at the three
Author Manuscript                   SNRs as given in Table II. AECNN-SM1 and AECNN-SM2 are the best in terms of STOI
                                    and PESQ. AECNN-RI is the best for SI-SDR at 5 dB but AECNN-SM1 is better at 0 dB
                                    and -5 dB. Note that we compare AECNN-SM1-MAE with AECNN-RI-MSE. AECNN-
                                    SM1 and AECNN-SM2 have similar STOI and PESQ scores but AECNN-SM1 is
                                    consitently better in terms of SI-SDR, making it the better enhancement approach.

                                    For illustration, we plot spectrograms of a sample utterance in Fig. 3. We can observe that
                                    the DNN based IRM estimator does not appear to distort the speech signal by much but is
                                    not able to remove some of the noise as can be seen for low-frequency regions around 1.25s.
                                    AECNN-T reduces the noise more but still retains some noise as can be observed in the low-
                                    frequency region around 2.5s. The enhanced spectrogram using the STFT magnitude loss
                                    looks closest to the clean spectrogram, and is better not only for noise reduction but also
                                    seems to introduce relatively negligible distortions compared to the clean spectrogram.

                                    The frequency domain loss functions using the real and imaginary part of the STFT do not
                                    perform as well as a loss based on the STFT magnitude. One explanation for this
                                    observation is that the STFT magnitude exhibits clearer temporal structure than the real part
                                    or imaginary part. Also, it is non-negative, and likely easier to learn. As analyzed in [43],
                                    structure exists in the absolute of the real and the imaginary part of the STFT of a speech
                                    signal. Fig. 4 shows the signs and the absolute values of the real and imaginary parts of
                                    STFT for a sample utterance. To plot the absolute values, we first normalize the relevant data
                                    to the value range [10-8, 1] and then take their logarithm. We observe that the signs of real
                                    and imaginary parts are very noisy whereas there is a clear structure in their absolute values.
                                    This suggests that the real and the imaginary parts that are obtained by multiplying the signs
                                    and the absolute values would be unstructured. It further suggests that a model trained using
                                    a loss on the absolute values of the real or the imaginary part of STFT should perform better
                                    than a loss defined directly on the real and imaginary parts. To verify, we have trained
                                    models using a loss on the absolute value of the real and the imaginary part of the STFT.
                                    The PESQ scores for noise-dependent models trained on babble noise are plotted in Fig. 5.
                                    We can see that using the absolute values improves the PESQ score and makes the
                                    performance comparable to the AECNN-SM1 model. We obtain similar results for the other
                                    four noises and noise-independent models.

                                    Next, we compare learned phase with noisy phase and clean phase. The noisy test utterances
                                    constructed from the TIMIT corpus are used to obtain two STFT magnitudes: noisy STFT
                                    magnitude and STFT magnitude enhanced by the baseline DNN estimator. The two
                                    magnitudes are combined with three kinds of phase: noisy phase, learned phase and clean
                                    phase, to reconstruct a signal in the time domain. STOI, PESQ and SI-SDR values are
                                    compared with their corresponding mixture values. These scores at 3 SNR conditions are
                                    plotted in Fig. 6. Note that the last column is for the factory2 noise which is enhanced using

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 12

Author Manuscript                   the noise-independent model. In all the plots, the three lower lines are for the speech
                                    reconstructed from the noisy STFT magnitudes and upper three lines are for the speech
Author Manuscript                   reconstructed using the enhanced STFT magnitude. We observe that the results with the
                                    learned phase are consistently better than those with the mixture phase. This suggests that
Author Manuscript                   the learned phase is better than the noisy phase for both the noise-dependent and noise-
                                    independent models. Using the clean phase all the scores are significantly better over the
                                    noisy phase. This performance gap is partly filled by using the learned phase. On the other
                                    hand, there is room for improvement if a neural network can learn to estimate a phase closer
                                    to the clean phase.

                                    The proposed method is further evaluated on the IEEE dataset for speaker-dependent but
                                    noise-independent training on a large number of noises. The performance and comparison
                                    with the DNN baseline in STOI are given in Table III. The DNN model improves the STOI
                                    score by 16.6% at the -5 dB SNR, which is a difficult and untrained SNR condition. In this
                                    cndition the proposed framework improves the STOI score by 23.3%, which represents a
                                    substantial improvement. The STOI improvement over the baseline is 5.5% at -2 dB, 4% at
                                    0 dB and 1.6% at 5 dB.

                                    The baseline DNN used here has 20.5 million parameters whereas our model has only 6.4
                                    million parameters. The DNN takes the acoustic features of 23 consecutive frames and
                                    outputs the IRM of 5 consecutive frames. It means that it uses information from 240 ms of
                                    speech and outputs 60 ms of speech. Our model operates on a speech of duration 128 ms and
                                    outputs a speech of duration 128 ms.

                                    Finally, we evaluate the proposed method for noise- and speaker-independent speech
                                    enhancement trained on a large training set created from the WSJ0 SI-84 dataset. The
                                    evaluation results for untrained speakers on untrained babble and cafeteria are given in Table
                                    IV. Again, the proposed framework produces substantially better STOI and PESQ scores
                                    than the baseline GRN which is 62-layer deep and operates on a whole utterance. It means
                                    that the past and future context are maximal for the baseline model. Our model operates on a
                                    frame of duration 1024 ms. For this difficult task, the past and future contexts are very
                                    important, as analyzed in [34]. We can increase the context in our model by increasing the
                                    size of the input frame, but we find that the performance does not improve further by
                                    increasing the frame size. One explanation for our better performance is that the GRN model
                                    uses the mixture phase whereas our model learns the phase itself, which we have shown is
                                    better than the mixture phase.

Author Manuscript  VII. Concluding Remarks

                                     In this paper, we have proposed a novel approach to train a fully convolutional neural
                                     network for speech enhancement in the time domain. The key idea is to use a frequency
                                     domain loss to train the CNN. We have investigated different types of loss function in the
                                     frequency domain. Our main observation is that frequency domain loss is better than a time
                                     domain loss. Using a frequency domain loss helps to improve objective quality and
                                     intelligibility. The highest improvement is obtained using an MAE loss computed on STFT
                                    magnitudes defined using L1 norm. The best SI-SDR score is achieved using a loss on the

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang  Page 13

Author Manuscript                   real and imaginary part of STFT. We have evaluated our method for speech enhancement in
                                    speaker-dependent but noise-independent, and speaker- and noise-independent scenarios. In
Author Manuscript                   all the cases, the proposed method substantially outperforms the current state-of-the-art
                                    methods.

                                    Other frequency domain losses do not perform as well as an STFT magnitude loss. This
                                    might be due to better structure in the STFT magnitude. We also observe that there is clear
                                    structure in the absolute of the real and imaginary part of the STFT. Training a model with a
                                    loss on the absolute value of the real and imaginary part of the STFT gives comparable
                                    performance to the STFT magnitude based loss.

                                    We have also tried to make the real and imaginary part of STFT bounded or squashed with a
                                    Tanh or sigmoidal function, but not much improvement is obtained. Also, one might think
                                    that the logarithm of STFT magnitude should perform better, but that is not what we
                                    observe, probably because of a log operation involved in the training process. We also find
                                    that the performance of the proposed framework drops significantly when input and output
                                    lengths are reduced to one frame from four frames. Future research needs to develop
                                    methods for real-time implementation with comparable performance.

                                    Although trained with a loss on only the STFT magnitudes, the proposed framework learns a
                                    phase structure itself as it generates a signal in the time domain. We find that learned phase
                                    is better than mixture phase but not as good as clean phase. A future research direction is to
                                    explore ways to train a deep model to improve phase estimation.

Author Manuscript  Acknowledgment

                                         The authors would like to thank Ke Tan for providing GRN results for comparison.
                                         This work was supported in part by NIDCD under Grants R01 DC012048 and R02 DCDC015521 and in part by the
                                         Ohio Supercomputer Center.

                   Biography

Author Manuscript                    Ashuosh Pandey received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication engineering
                                     from Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, India, in 2011. He is currently
                                     working toward the Ph.D. degree at The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. His
                                     research interests include speech separation and deep learning.

                                     DeLiang Wang's photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.

                   References

                                       [1]. Loizou PC, Speech Enhancement: Theory and Practice, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
                                             2013.

                             IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 14

Author Manuscript                   [2]. Wang DL and Brown GJ, Eds., Computational Auditory Scene Analysis: Principles, Algorithms,
                                          and Applications. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2006.
Author Manuscript
                                    [3]. Wang DL and Chen J, "Supervised speech separation based on deep learning: An overview,"
Author Manuscript                         IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1702-1726, 10. 2018.
                                          [PubMed: 31223631]
Author Manuscript
                                    [4]. Lu X, Tsao Y, Matsuda S, and Hori C, "Speech enhancement based on deep denoising
                                          autoencoder," in Proc. Interspeech, 2013, pp. 436-440.

                                    [5]. Wang Y and Wang DL, "Towards scaling up classification-based speech separation," IEEE Trans.
                                          Audio, Speech, Lang. Process, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 1381-1390, 7. 2013.

                                    [6]. Xu Y, Du J, Dai L-R, and Lee C-H, "A regression approach to speech enhancement based on deep
                                          neural networks," IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 7-19, 1.
                                          2015.

                                    [7]. Park SR and Lee J, "A fully convolutional neural network for speech enhancement," in Proc.
                                          Interspeech, 2017, pp. 1993-1997.

                                    [8]. Pascual S, Bonafonte A, and Serr J, "SEGAN: Speech enhancement generative adversarial
                                          network," in Proc. Interspeech, 2017, pp. 3642-3646.

                                    [9]. Fu S-W, Tsao Y, Lu X, and Kawai H, "Raw waveform-based speech enhancement by fully
                                          convolutional networks," 2017, arXiv:1703.02205.

                                    [10]. Wang Y and Wang DL, "A deep neural network for time-domain signal reconstruction," in Proc.
                                          IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process, 2015, pp. 4390-4394.

                                    [11]. Wang Z-Q, Le Roux J, Wang DL, and Hershey J, "End-to-end speech separation with unfolded
                                          iterative phase reconstruction," in Proc. Inter-speech, 2018, pp. 2708-2712.

                                    [12]. Gunawan D and Sen D, "Iterative phase estimation for the synthesis of separated sources from
                                          single-channel mixtures," IEEE Signal Process. Lett, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 421-424, 5 2010.

                                    [13]. Griffin D and Lim J, "Signal estimation from modified short-time fourier transform," IEEE
                                          Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 236-243, 4. 1984.

                                    [14]. Fu S-W, Wang T-W, Tsao Y, Lu X, and Kawai H, "End-to-end waveform utterance enhancement
                                          for direct evaluation metrics optimization by fully convolutional neural networks," IEEE/ACM
                                          Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1570-1584, 9. 2018.

                                    [15]. Goodfellow I et al. "Generative adversarial nets," in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst,
                                          2014, pp. 2672-2680.

                                    [16]. Qian K, Zhang Y, Chang S, Yang X, Florêncio D, and Hasegawa-Johnson M, "Speech
                                          enhancement using Bayesian wavenet," in Proc. Interspeech, 2017, pp. 2013-2017.

                                    [17]. Rethage D, Pons J, and Serra X, "A wavenet for speech denoising," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
                                          Acoust., Speech Signal Process, 2018, pp. 5069-5073.

                                    [18]. Oord A. v. d. et al., "Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio," 2016, arXiv:1609.03499

                                    [19]. Luo Y and Mesgarani N, "TasNet: Surpassing ideal time-frequency masking for speech
                                          separation," 2018, arXiv:1809.07454

                                    [20]. Pandey A and Wang DL, "A new framework for supervised speech enhancement in the time
                                          domain," in Proc. Interspeech, 2018, pp. 1136-1140.

                                    [21]. Pandey A and Wang DL, "On adversarial training and loss functions for speech enhancement," in
                                          Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process, 2018, pp. 5414-5418.

                                    [22]. Noh H, Hong S, and Han B, "Learning deconvolution network for semantic segmentation," in
                                          Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis, 2015, pp. 1520-1528.

                                    [23]. Ronneberger O, Fischer P, and Brox T, "U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
                                          segmentation," in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2015, pp.
                                          234-241.

                                    [24]. Hochreiter S, Bengio Y, and Frasconi P, "Gradient flow in recurrent nets: The difficulty of
                                          learning long-term dependencies," in Field Guide to Dynamical Recurrent Networks, Kolen J
                                          Kremer S, Eds., Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2001.

                                    [25]. He K, Zhang X, Ren S, and Sun J, "Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level
                                          performance on ImageNet classification," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis, 2015, pp. 1026-
                                          1034.

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 15

Author Manuscript                   [26]. Srivastava N, Hinton G, Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, and Salakhutdinov R, "Dropout: A simple
                                          way to prevent neural networks from overfitting," J. Mach. Learn. Res, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929-
Author Manuscript                         1958, 2014.

Author Manuscript                   [27]. Paul DB and Baker JM, "The design for the wall street journal-based CSR corpus," in Proc.
                                          Workshop Speech Natural Lang, 1992, pp. 357-362.
Author Manuscript
                                    [28]. Chen J and Wang DL, "Long short-term memory for speaker generalization in supervised speech
                                          separation," J. Acoust. Soc. Amer, vol. 141, no. 6, pp. 4705-4714, 2017. [PubMed: 28679261]

                                    [29]. Han K, Wang Y, Wang DL, Woods WS, Merks I, and Zhang T, "Learning spectral mapping for
                                          speech dereverberation and denoising," IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol.
                                          23, no. 6, pp. 982-992, 6. 2015.

                                    [30]. Garofolo JS, Lamel LF, Fisher WM, Fiscus JG, and Pallett DS, "DARPA TIMIT acoustic-
                                          phonetic continuous speech corpus CD-ROM. NIST speech disc 1-1.1," Nat. Inst. Standards
                                          Technol, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, Tech. Rep. NISTIR 4930, 1993, vol. 93.

                                    [31]. Varga A and Steeneken HJ, "Assessment for automatic speech recognition: II. NOISEX-92: A
                                          database and an experiment to study the effect of additive noise on speech recognition systems,"
                                          Speech Commun., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 247-251, 1993.

                                    [32]. Wang Y, Narayanan A, and Wang DL, "On training targets for supervised speech separation,"
                                          IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1849-1858, 12. 2014.
                                          [PubMed: 25599083]

                                    [33]. IEEE, "IEEE recommended practice for speech quality measurements," IEEE Trans. Audio
                                          Electroacoust, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 225-246, 9. 1969.

                                    [34]. Chen J, Wang Y, Yoho SE, Wang DL, and Healy EW, "Large-scale training to increase speech
                                          intelligibility for hearing-impaired listeners in novel noises," J. Acoust. Soc. Amer, vol. 139, no.
                                          5, pp. 2604-2612, 2016. [PubMed: 27250154]

                                    [35]. Tan K, Chen J, and Wang DL, "Gated residual networks with dilated convolutions for supervised
                                          speech separation," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process, 2018, pp. 21-25.

                                    [36]. Glorot X and Bengio Y, "Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
                                          networks," in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist, 2010, pp. 249-256.

                                    [37]. Kingma D and Ba J, "Adam: A method for stochastic optimization," 2014, arXiv:1412.6980

                                    [38]. Erdogan H, Hershey JR, Watanabe S, and Le Roux J, "Phase-sensitive and recognition-boosted
                                          speech separation using deep recurrent neural networks," in Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech
                                          Signal Process, 2015, pp. 708-712.

                                    [39]. Taal CH, Hendriks RC, Heusdens R, and Jensen J, "An algorithm for intelligibility prediction of
                                          time-frequency weighted noisy speech," IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process, vol. 19, no.
                                          7, pp. 2125-2136, 9. 2011.

                                    [40]. Rix AW, Beerends JG, Hollier MP, and Hekstra AP, "Perceptual evaluation of speech quality
                                          (PESQ) - A new method for speech quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs," in
                                          Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process, 2001, pp. 749-752.

                                    [41]. Vincent E, Gribonval R, and Févotte C, "Performance measurement in blind audio source
                                          separation," IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1462-1469, 7. 2006.

                                    [42]. Fu S-W, Hu T.-y., Tsao Y, and Lu X, "Complex spectrogram enhancement by convolutional
                                          neural network with multi-metrics learning," in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Mach. Learn. Signal
                                          Process, 2017, pp. 1-6.

                                    [43]. Williamson DS, Wang Y, and Wang DL, "Complex ratio masking for monaural speech
                                          separation," IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 483-492, 3.
                                          2016. [PubMed: 27069955]

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang  Page 16

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript            Fig. 1.
                            Block diagram showing the steps involved in computing a frequency domain loss from the
Author Manuscript
                           time domain frames at the output of network. L denotes the number of frames of size 2048,
                           and N the length of the enhanced utterance obtained after overlap-and-add. M is the number
                            of frames of size 512. Dr and Di represent the real and the imaginary part of the DFT matrix,
                            respectively.

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang  Page 17

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript            Fig. 2.
                            A schematic diagram illustrating the architecture of the proposed model. The numbers

                           represent the output dimension after each layer where M × N denotes a signal with
                           dimension M and number of channels equal to N. Note that the number of channels in the
                            decoder is double of that in the encoder because of the concatenation of the incoming
                            connection from the symmetric layer of the encoder. Arrows denote skip connections.

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 18

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript                   Fig. 3.
                                    Spectrogram of a sample utterance mixed with babble noise at -5 dB SNR, and its enhanced
                                    spectrograms using different models. (a) Noisy spectrogram. (b) Spectrogram enhanced
                                    using a DNN based IRM estimator. (c) Spectrogram enhanced using AECNN trained with a
                                    time domain loss. (d) Spectrogram enhanced using AECNN trained with an STFT
                                    magnitude loss. (e) Clean spectrogram.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 19

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript                   Fig. 4.
                                    STFT structure. Plots of the sign of real and imaginary part of STFT of a sample utterance
                                    are shown in (a) and (b). In these plots, black and white dots denote -1 and 1 respectively.
                                    The signs of the real and imaginary parts of STFT are very noisy. Plots (c) and (d) show the
                                    structure of the absolute of the real and imaginary part of STFT of the same utterance.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                              Page 20

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript                   Fig. 5.
                                    PESQ comparisons of real-valued and absolute-valued loss functions. (a) PESQ scores of the
                                    models trained on the real part and the absolute of the real part of STFT. (b) PESQ scores of
                                    the models trained on the imaginary part and the absolute of the imaginary part of STFT.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                                    Page 21

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript                   Fig. 6.
                                    STOI, PESQ, and SI-SDR comparisons between learned phase, noisy phase, and clean
                                    phase.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

                   IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                                                                                             Author Manuscript        Author Manuscript                         Author Manuscript        Author Manuscript

                                                                                                                                                                                               TABLE I                         Pandey and Wang
                                                                                             Performance Comparison Between Various Loss Functions and Network Models for Noise-Dependent Models Trained on the TIMIT Dataset

                                                                                                  SNR                 -5 dB                      0 dB                     5 dB
                                                                                                 Metric                                          PESQ                     PESQ
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.     Mixture         STOI (%) PESQ  SI-SDR  STOI (%)   1.72  SI-SDR  STOI (%)   2.05  SI-SDR
                                                                                                  DNN                            -4.8     68.2    2.34     0.1     78.9    2.74     5.1
                                                                                                SEGAN           56.5  1.41        2.8     80.4    2.28     7.5     87.7    2.60    11.9
                                                                                               SEGAN-T                            7.1     86.0    2.22    10.3     90.2    2.57    12.5
                                                                                                                69.7  1.88        7.6     87.2    2.46    11.2     91.3    2.78    13.5
                                                                                               AECNN-T                            7.7     87.3    2.41    11.2     91.5    2.80    13.6
                                                                                                                76.8  1.77        8.2     88.2    2.60    11.7     92.3    2.90    14.3
                                                                                              AECNN-RI                            8.0     88.0    2.48    11.5     92.2    2.86    13.9
                                                                                                         MAE    77.7  1.73        8.6     89.0    2.56    12.0     92.8    2.90    14.3
                                                                                             AECNN-SM1   MSE                      8.1     88.1    2.68    11.6     92.2    3.01    14.1
                                                                                                         MAE    77.9  2.01        8.0     89.0    2.60    11.4     92.8    2.90    13.7
                                                                                             AECNN-SM2   MSE                      7.5     88.0    2.70    11.1     92.2    3.02    13.6
                                                                                                         MAE    78.9  1.88        7.8     89.0    2.60    10.8     92.7            12.7
                                                                                                         MSE                      7.3     88.1            10.7     92.1     2.9    12.9
                                                                                                         MAE    78.6  2.00
                                                                                                         MSE
                                                                                                         MAE    80.0  1.92
                                                                                                         MSE
                                                                                                                78.6  2.00

                                                                                                                80.3  2.20

                                                                                                                78.9  2.20

                                                                                                                80.2  2.20

                                                                                                                78.9  2.20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page 22
                                                                                             Author Manuscript        Author Manuscript                         Author Manuscript        Author Manuscript

                                                                                                                                                                                              TABLE II                       Pandey and Wang
                                                                                             Performance Comparison Between Various Loss Functions and Network Models Noise-Independent Models Trained on the TIMIT Dataset

                                                                                                  SNR                 -5 dB                      0 dB                     5 dB
                                                                                                 Metric                                          PESQ                     PESQ
IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.     Mixture         STOI (%) PESQ  SI-SDR  STOI (%)   2.00  SI-SDR  STOI (%)   2.35  SI-SDR
                                                                                                  DNN                            -4.8     76.3    2.64     0.1     84.4    2.99     5.1
                                                                                                SEGAN           66.8  1.63        6.5     84.8    2.56    10.7     90.0    2.77    14.6
                                                                                               SEGAN-T                            9.1     89.1    2.47    11.5     91.3    2.75    12.8
                                                                                                                76.3  2.21       10.3     90.4    2.70    13.2     93.0    2.94    15.0
                                                                                               AECNN-T                           10.1     90.1    2.64    13.0     92.7    2.93    14.9
                                                                                                                83.3  2.15       10.7     91.1    2.79    13.8     93.6    3.05    15.7
                                                                                              AECNN-RI                           10.1     90.8    2.66    13.1     93.3    2.96    14.8
                                                                                                         MAE    83.9  2.01       11.0     91.3    2.79    13.9     93.8    3.05    15.7
                                                                                             AECNN-SM1   MSE                     10.1     90.7    2.93    13.3     93.2    3.15    15.2
                                                                                                         MAE    84.0  2.33       10.6     91.7    2.85    13.4     93.9    3.08    14.9
                                                                                             AECNN-SM2   MSE                     10.2     91.0    2.94    13.2     93.4    3.19    15.1
                                                                                                         MAE    84.7  2.14       10.0     91.9    2.87    12.6     94.2    3.10    14.0
                                                                                                         MSE                      9.7     91.3            12.7     93.7            14.4
                                                                                                         MAE    84.5  2.35
                                                                                                         MSE
                                                                                                         MAE    84.8  2.12
                                                                                                         MSE
                                                                                                                84.5  2.36

                                                                                                                85.7  2.50

                                                                                                                85.1  2.50

                                                                                                                85.9  2.51

                                                                                                                85.1  2.51

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 23
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                                     Page 24

Author Manuscript                                                                      TABLE III

                   Performance Comparison Between the Baseline DNN and the Proposed Framework for Noise-Independent
                   Models Trained on the IEEE Dataset. The Scores Denote the Percent Improvement in STOI Over Mixture

                                    Babble        Cafeteria

                          DNN AECNN-SM1     DNN AECNN-SM1

                   5 dB   12        13.6    13.3  14.4
                   0 dB
                   -2 dB  17.1      21.1    18.1  21.1
                   5 dB
                          18        23.5    18.7  22.5

                          16.6      23.3    17.5  21.5

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

                          IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
                   Pandey and Wang                                                                                         Page 25

Author Manuscript                                                                     TABLE IV

                   Comparison Between the Baseline GRN and the Proposed Method for Speaker- and Noise-Independent Model
                   Trained on the WSJ0 S1-84 Dataset and Tested on Untrained Speakers. The Scores Denote the Improvement
                   Over Mixture

                    Babble    -5 dB  GRN   STOI        GRN   PESQ
                   Cafeteria  -2 dB  17.3  AECNN-SM1   0.43  AECNN-SM1
                              -5 dB   17               0.59
                              -2 dB  17.8        22.6  0.67        0.61
                                     17.7        21.9  0.77        0.84
                                                 22.5              0.77
                                                 21.9              0.93

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

                              IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 July 13.
