
View
Online

Export
Citation
CrossMark
JULY 05 2022
A survey of sound source localization with deep learning
methods
Pierre-Amaury Grumiaux; Srđan Kitić; Laurent Girin; ... et. al
J Acoust Soc Am 152, 107–151 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Related Content
A multiple target acoustic scene representation model for bat echolocation signals
J Acoust Soc Am (May 1997)
Comparison of enhancement techniques based on neural networks for attenuated voice signal captured by
flexible vibration sensors on throats
Nanotechnology and Precision Engineering (January 2022)
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


A survey of sound source localization with deep learning
methods
Pierre-Amaury Grumiaux,1,a) Srd-an Kitic´,2 Laurent Girin,3 and Alexandre Gu/C19erin2
1Nantes Universit/C19e, /C19Ecole Centrale Nantes, CNRS, LS2N, 2 chemin de la Houssinie`re, F-44332 Nantes, France
2Orange Labs, 4 Rue du Clos Courtel, 35510 Cesson-S/C19evign/C19e, France
3Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble-INP, GIPSA-lab, 11 Rue des Math/C19ematiques, 38400 Saint-Martin-d’He`res, France
ABSTRACT:
This article is a survey of deep learning methods for single and multiple sound source localization, with a focus on
sound source localization in indoor environments, where reverberation and diffuse noise are present. We provide an
extensive topography of the neural network-based sound source localization literature in this context, organized
according to the neural network architecture, the type of input features, the output strategy (classiﬁcation or regres-
sion), the types of data used for model training and evaluation, and the model training strategy. Tables summarizing
the literature survey are provided at the end of the paper, allowing a quick search of methods with a given set of
target characteristics. VC 2022 Acoustical Society of America. https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
(Received 26 November 2021; revised 13 May 2022; accepted 6 June 2022; published online 5 July 2022)
[Editor: Peter Gerstoft] Pages: 107–151
I. INTRODUCTION
Sound source localization (SSL) is the problem of esti-
mating the position of one or several sound sources relative
to some arbitrary reference position, which is generally the
position of the recording microphone array, based on the
recorded multichannel acoustic signals. In most practical
cases, SSL is simpliﬁed to the estimation of the sources’
direction of arrival (DoA), i.e., it focuses on the estimation
of azimuth and elevation angles, without estimating the dis-
tance to the microphone array (therefore, unless otherwise
speciﬁed, in this article we use the terms “SSL” and “DoA
estimation” interchangeably). SSL has numerous practical
applications—for instance, in source separation (e.g.,
Chazan et al. , 2019 ), automatic speech recognition (ASR)
(e.g., Lee et al. , 2016 ), speech enhancement (e.g., Xenaki
et al. , 2018 ), human-robot interaction, (e.g., Li et al. ,
2016a), noise control, (e.g., Chiariotti et al. , 2019 ), and
room acoustic analysis (e.g., Amengual Gar/C19 ıet al., 2017). In
this paper, we focus on sound sources in the audible range
(typically speech and audio signals) in indoor (ofﬁce or
domestic) environments.
Although SSL is a long-standing and widely researched
topic ( Argentieri et al. , 2015 ; Benesty et al. , 2008 ;
Brandstein and Ward, 2001 ; Cobos et al. , 2017 ; DiBiase
et al., 2001; Gerzon, 1992; Hickling et al., 1993; Knapp and
Carter, 1976 ; Nehorai and Paldi, 1994 ), it remains a very
challenging problem to date. Traditional SSL methods are
based on signal/channel models and signal processing (SP)
techniques. Although they have shown notable advances in
the domain over the years, they are known to perform poorly
in difﬁcult yet common scenarios where noise, reverbera-
tion, and several simultaneously emitting sound sources
may be present ( Blandin et al., 2012 ; Evers et al., 2020 ). In
the last decade, the potential of data-driven deep learning
(DL) techniques for addressing such difﬁcult scenarios has
received an increasing interest. As a result, an increasing
number of SSL systems based on deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been proposed in recent years. Most of the
reported works have indicated the superiority of DNN-based
SSL methods over conventional (i.e., SP-based) SSL meth-
ods. For example, Chakrabarty and Habets (2017a) showed
that, in low signal-to-noise ratio conditions, using a CNN
led to a twofold increase in overall DoA classiﬁcation accu-
racy compared to using the conventional method called
steered response power with phase transform (SRP-PHAT)
(see Sec. III). In Perotin et al. (2018b), the authors were able
to obtain a 25% increase in DoA classiﬁcation accuracy
when using a convolutional recurrent neural network
(CRNN) over a method based on independent component
analysis (ICA). Finally, Adavanne et al. (2018) proved that
employing a CRNN can reduce the average angular error by
50% in reverberant conditions compared to the conventional
MUSIC algorithm (see Sec. III).
This kind of result has further motivated the expansion
of scientiﬁc papers on DL applied to SSL. In the meantime,
there has been no comprehensive survey of the existing
approaches, which would be very useful for researchers and
practitioners in the domain. Although we can ﬁnd reviews
mostly focused on conventional methods, e.g., ( Argentieri
et al., 2015 ; Cobos et al., 2017 ; Evers et al., 2020 ; Gannot
et al., 2019 ), to the best of our knowledge only a very few
a)Also at: Orange Labs, 4 Rue du Clos Courtel, F-35510 Cesson-S /C19evign/C19e,
France, and at Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble-INP, CNRS, GIPSA-lab,
11 Rue des Math /C19ematiques, F-38400 Saint-Martin-d’He `res, France.
Electronic mail: pierreamaury.grumiaux@gmail.com
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 VC 2022 Acoustical Society of America 1070001-4966/2022/152(1)/107/45/$30.00
REVIEW-ARTICLE................................................
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


have explicitly targeted SSL with DL methods. Ahmad
et al. (2021) presented a short survey of several existing DL
models and datasets for SSL before proposing a DL archi-
tecture of their own. Bianco et al. (2019) and Purwins et al.
(2019) presented an interesting overview of machine learn-
ing applied to various problems in audio and acoustics.
Nevertheless, only a short portion of each of these two
reviews is dedicated to SSL with DNNs.
A. Aim of the paper
The goal of this paper is to ﬁll this gap, and to provide a
thorough survey of the SSL literature using DL techniques.
More precisely, we examined and review 156 papers pub-
lished from 2011 to 2021. We classify and discuss the differ-
ent approaches in terms of characteristics of the employed
methods and addressed conﬁgurations (e.g., single-source vs
multi-source localization setup or neural network architec-
ture; the exact list is given in Sec. IC ). In other words, we
present a taxonomy of the DL-based SSL literature published
in the last decade. At the end of the paper, we present a sum-
mary of this survey in the form of four tables (one for the
period 2011–2018, and one for each of the years 2019, 2020,
and 2021). All of the methods that we reviewed are reported
in these tables with a summary of their characteristics pre-
sented in different columns. This enables the reader to rapidly
select the subset of methods having a given set of characteris-
tics if they are interested in that particular type of method.
Note that in this survey paper, we do not aim to evalu-
ate and compare the performance of the different systems.
Due to the large number of DNN-based SSL papers and the
diversity of conﬁgurations, such a contribution would be
very difﬁcult and cumbersome (albeit very useful), espe-
cially because the discussed systems are often trained and
evaluated on different datasets. As we will see later, listing
and commenting on these different datasets is, however, part
of our survey effort. Note also that we do not consider SSL
systems that exploit other modalities in addition to sound,
e.g., audio-visual systems ( Ban et al. , 2018 ; Masuyama
et al. , 2020 ; Wu et al. , 2021c ). Finally, we do consider
DL-based methods for joint sound event localization and
detection (SELD), which is a combination of sound event
detection (SED; here detection actually means classiﬁca-
tion) and SSL, and in that case, we focus on the localization
task. In particular, we include in the review the SELD meth-
ods presented to the DCASE Challenge (and/or to the corre-
sponding DCASE Workshop) in 2019, 2020, and 2021 (see
the DCASE Community, 2022 ). One of the tasks of this
challenge is precisely dedicated to SELD, which has con-
tributed to making the DL-based SSL (and SED) problem a
popular research topic over the recent years.
B. General principle of DL-based SSL
The general principle of DL-based SSL methods and
systems can be schematized with a simple pipeline, as illus-
trated in Fig. 1. A multichannel input signal recorded with a
microphone array is processed by a feature extraction
module to provide input features. These input features are
fed into a DNN, which delivers an estimate of the source
location or DoA. As discussed later in the paper, a recent
trend is to skip the feature extraction module to directly feed
the network with multichannel raw data. In any case, the
two fundamental reasons behind the design of such SSL are
the following.
First, multichannel signals recorded with an array of I
microphones distributed in space contain information about
the location of the source(s). Indeed, when the microphones
are close to each other compared to their distance to the sour-
ce(s), the microphone signal waveforms, although appearing
similar from a distance, exhibit more or less notable and
complex differences in terms of delay and amplitude,
depending on the experimental setup. These interchannel dif-
ferences are due to distinct propagation paths from the source
to the different microphones, for both the direct path (line of
sight between source and microphone) and the numerous
reﬂections that compose the reverberation in an indoor envi-
ronment. In other words, a source signal sjðtÞ is convolved
with different room impulse responses (RIRs) ai;jðtÞ,w h i c h
depend on the source position, microphone position and
directivity (I denotes the microphone index in the array), and
acoustic environment conﬁguration (e.g., room shape):
xiðtÞ¼ ai;jðtÞ ? sjðtÞþ niðtÞ
¼
XT/C0 1
s¼0
ai;jðsÞsjðt /C0 sÞþ niðtÞ; (1)
where xiðtÞ denotes the resulting recorded signal at micro-
phone i, niðtÞ is the noise signal at microphone i (diffuse,
“background” noise and possibly some sensor noise), and ?
denotes the convolution (note that we work with digital sig-
nals and t and s are discrete time indexes; T is the effective
length of the RIR). Therefore, the recorded signal contains
information on the relative source-to-microphone array posi-
tion. The microphone signals are often expressed in the
time-frequency (TF) domain, using the short-term Fourier
transform (STFT), where the convolution in Eq. (1) is
assumed to transform into a product between the STFT of
the source signal Sjðf ; nÞ and the acoustic transfer function
(ATF) Ai;jðf Þ, which is the (discrete) Fourier transform of
the corresponding RIR and is thus encoding the source spa-
tial information ( f denotes the frequency bin, and n is the
STFT frame index) ( Gannot et al. , 2017 ; Vincent et al. ,
2018),
Xiðf ; nÞ¼ Ai;jðf ÞSjðf ; nÞþ Niðf ; nÞ: (2)
When several, say J, sources are present, the recorded signal
is the sum of their contribution (plus the noise),
FIG. 1. General pipeline of a DL-based SSL system.
108 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


xiðtÞ¼
XJ
j¼1
ai;jðtÞ ? sjðtÞþ niðtÞ: (3)
This latter equation is often reformulated in the TF domain
in matrix form,
Xðf ; nÞ¼ Aðf ÞSðf ; nÞþ Nðf ; nÞ; (4)
where Xðf ; nÞ¼½ X1ðf ; nÞ; … ; XI ðf ; nÞ/C138> is the microphone
signal vector, Aðf Þ is the matrix gathering the ATFs,
Sðf ; nÞ¼½ S1ðf ; nÞ; … ; SJ ðf ; nÞ/C138> is the source signal vector,
and Nðf ; nÞ¼½ N1ðf ; nÞ; … ; NIðf ; nÞ/C138> is the noise vector. In
that multi-source case, the difﬁculty of the SSL problem is
that the contributions of the different sources generally over-
lap in time. SSL then requires to proceed to some kind of
source clustering, which is generally easier to proceed in the
frequency or TF domain due to the natural sparsity of audio
sources in that domain ( Rickard, 2002). In this paper, we do
not describe the foundations of source-to-microphone propa-
gation in more detail. They can be found in several referen-
ces on general acoustics, e.g., ( Jacobsen and Juhl, 2013 ;
Rossing, 2007 ), room acoustics, e.g., ( Kuttruff, 2016), array
signal processing (e.g., Benesty et al., 2008; Brandstein and
Ward, 2001 ; Jarrett et al. , 2017 ; Rafaely, 2019 ), speech
enhancement and audio source separation (e.g., Gannot
et al., 2017; Vincent et al., 2018), and many papers on con-
ventional SSL.
The second reason for designing DNN-based SSL sys-
tems is that even if the relationship between the information
contained in the multichannel signal and the location of the
source(s) is generally complex [especially in a multisource
reverberant and noisy conﬁguration, see Eqs. (3) and (4)],
DNNs are powerful models that are able to automatically
identify and exploit this relationship, given that they are pro-
vided with a sufﬁciently large number of representative
training examples. This ability of data-driven DL methods
to replace conventional methods based on a signal/channel
model and SP techniques—or at least a part of them, since
the feature extractor module can be based on conventional
processing—makes them attractive for addressing problems
such as SSL. While some conventional methods can adapt
to the observed signals (e.g., Dvorkind and Gannot, 2005 ;
Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2020 ; Li et al., 2016a ,b), they are
all intrinsically based on certain (more or less plausible)
modeling assumptions, which can limit their effectiveness
when exposed to the complexity of real-world acoustics.
Deep learning models do not explicitly impose any such
assumptions, and instead they efﬁciently adapt to the pre-
sented training data. This is, however, also the major draw-
back of the DNN-based approaches, as they are less generic
than traditional methods. A deep model designed for and
trained in a given conﬁguration (e.g., a given microphone
array geometry) will not provide satisfying localization
results if the setup changes ( Le Moing et al. , 2021 ; Liu
et al., 2018), unless some relevant adaptation method can be
used, which is still an open problem in DL in general.
C. Outline of the paper
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Sec. II, we specify the context and scope of the survey in
terms of the considered acoustic environment and sound
source conﬁgurations. In Sec. III, we brieﬂy present the
most common conventional SSL methods, for two reasons:
ﬁrst, they are often used as a baseline for the evaluation of
DL-based methods; and second, we will see that several
types of features extracted by conventional methods can be
used in DL-based methods. Section IV aims to classify the
different neural network architectures used for SSL. Section
V presents the various types of input features used for SSL
with neural networks. In Sec. VI, we explain the two output
strategies employed in DL-based SSL: classiﬁcation and
regression. We then discuss in Sec. VII the datasets used for
training and evaluating the models. In Sec. VIII, learning
paradigms such as supervised or semi-supervised learning
are discussed from the SSL perspective. Section IX provides
the four summary tables and concludes the paper. Note that,
due to the large number of acronyms used in this survey
paper, we provide a list of these acronyms in Table I.
II. ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT AND SOUND SOURCE
CONFIGURATIONS
SSL has been applied in different conﬁgurations,
depending on the application. In this section, we specify the
scope of our survey in terms of acoustic environment (noisy,
reverberant, or even multi-room) and the nature of the con-
sidered sound sources (their type, number, and static/mobile
status).
A. Acoustic environments
In this paper, we focus on SSL in an indoor environ-
ment, i.e., when the microphone array and the sound sour-
ce(s) are present in a closed room, generally of moderate
size, typically an ofﬁce room or a domestic environment.
This implies reverberation: in addition to the direct source-
to-microphone propagation path, the recorded sound con-
tains many other multi-path components of the same source.
All of these components form the RIR, which is deﬁned for
each source position and microphone array position (includ-
ing orientation) and for a given room conﬁguration.
In a general manner, the presence of reverberation is
seen as a notable perturbation that makes SSL more difﬁcult
compared to the simpler (but somewhat unrealistic)
anechoic case, which assumes the absence of reverberation,
as is obtained in the free ﬁeld propagation setup. Another
important adverse factor to take into account in SSL is
noise. On the one hand, noise can come from interfering
sound sources in the surrounding environment: TV, back-
ground music, pets, street noise passing through open or
closed windows, etc. Often, noise is considered diffuse, i.e.,
it does not originate from a clear direction. On the other
hand, the imperfections of the recording devices are another
source of noise that are generally considered artifacts.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 109
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Early works on using neural networks for DoA estima-
tion most often considered direct-path propagation only (the
anechoic setting) (e.g., El Zooghby et al. , 2000 ; Falong
et al. , 1993 ; Goryn and Kaveh, 1988 ; Jha et al. , 1988 ; Jha
and Durrani, 1989 , 1991; Rastogi et al. , 1987 ; Southall
et al., 1995; Yang et al., 1994), though a model of the acous-
tical environment was used to generate simulated data to
train the neural network of Datum et al. (1996). Most of
these works are from the pre-deep-learning era, using
“shallow” neural networks with only one or two hidden
layers ( Goodfellow et al. , 2016 ). We do not detail these
works in our survey, although we acknowledge them as pio-
neering contributions to the neural network-based DoA esti-
mation problem. A few more recent works based on more
“modern” neural network architectures also focused on
anechoic propagation only or did not consider sound sources
in the audible bandwidth ( Bialer et al. , 2019 ; Choi and
Chang, 2020 ; Elbir, 2020 ; Liu et al. , 2018 ; €Unleren and
Yaldiz, 2016).
B. Source types
In the SSL literature, a great proportion of systems
focuses on localizing speech sources because of their impor-
tance in related tasks such as speech enhancement or speech
recognition. Examples of speaker localization systems can
be found in papers by Chakrabarty and Habets (2019b) ;
Grumiaux et al. (2021b); Hao et al. (2020); He et al.
(2021a). In such systems, the neural networks are trained to
estimate the DoA of speech sources so that they are some-
what specialized in this type of source. Other systems, in
particular those participating in the DCASE Challenge, con-
sider a variety of sound source types ( Politis et al., 2020b ).
Depending on the challenge task and its corresponding data-
set, these methods are capable of localizing alarms, crying
babies, crashes, barking dogs, female/male screams, female/
male speech, footsteps, knockings on doors, ringings,
phones, and piano sounds. Note that the localization of such
sources, even if they overlap in time, is not necessarily a
more difﬁcult problem than the localization of several over-
lapping speakers, since the former usually have distinct
spectral characteristics that neural models may exploit for
better detection and localization.
TABLE I. Table of acronyms.
ACCDOA activity-coupled Cartesian direction of arrival
AE autoencoder
ATF acoustic transfer function
ASR automatic speech recognition
BGRU bidirectional gated recurrent unit
BIR binaural impulse response
BRIR binaural room impulse response
CC cross correlation
CNN convolutional neural network
CRNN convolutional recurrent neural network
CPS cross power spectrum
DCASE Detection and Classiﬁcation
of Acoustic Scenes and Events
DIRHA distant-speech interaction
for robust home applications
DL deep learning
DNN deep neural network
DoA direction of arrival
DP-RTF direct-path relative transfer function
DRR direct-to-reverberant ratio
EM expectation maximization
ESPRIT Estimation of Signal Parameters
via Rotational Invariance Techniques
EVD eigenvalue decomposition
FFNN feed-forward neural network
FOA ﬁrst-order Ambisonics
GAN generative adversarial network
GCC generalized cross correlation
GLU gated linear unit
GMM Gaussian mixture models
GMR Gaussian mixture regression
GPU graphical processing unit
GRU gated recurrent unit
HATS head-and-torso simulator
HOA higher-order Ambisonics
HRTF head-related transfer function
ICA independent component analysis
ILD interaural level difference
IPD interaural phase difference
ITD interaural time difference
ISM image source method
LSTM long short-term memory
MHSA multi-head self-attention
MLP Multi-Layer Perceptron
MOT multi-object tracking
MUSIC MUltiple SIgnal Classiﬁcation
NLP natural language processing
NoS number of sources
PHAT PHAse Transform
RIR room impulse response
RNN recurrent neural network
RTF relative transfer function
SA self-attention
SCM spatial covariance matrix
SED sound event detection
SELD sound event localization and detection
SH spherical harmonics
SMIR spherical microphone impulse response
SMN sequence matching network
SP signal processing
TABLE I. (Continued.)
SPS spatial pseudo-spectrum
SRP steered power response
SSL sound source localization
STFT short-term Fourier transform
TCN temporal convolutional network
TDoA time difference of arrival
TF time-frequency
VAD voice activity detection
VAE variational autoencoder
WDO W-disjoint orthogonality
110 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


C. Number of sources
The number of sources (NoS) in a recorded mixture sig-
nal is an important parameter for SSL. In the SSL literature,
the NoS might be considered as known (as a working
hypothesis). Alternatively, it can be estimated along with
the source location, in which case the SSL problem is a
combination of detection and localization. Examples of con-
ventional (non-deep) SSL works including NoS estimation
can be found in papers by Arberet et al. (2009) and
Landschoot and Xiang (2019) .
Many DNN-based works have considered only one
source to localize, as it is the simplest scenario to address
(e.g., Bologni et al. , 2021 ; Liu et al. , 2021 ; Perotin et al. ,
2018b). We refer to this scenario as single-source SSL. In
this case, the networks are trained and evaluated on datasets
with only at most one active source (a source is said to be
active when emitting sound and inactive otherwise). In
terms of NoS, we thus have here either 1 or 0 active source.
The activity of the source in the processed signal, which
generally contains background noise, can be artiﬁcially con-
trolled, i.e., the knowledge of source activity is a working
hypothesis. This is a reasonable approach at training time
when using synthetic data, but it is quite unrealistic at test
time on real-world data. Alternatively, the source activity
can be estimated, which is a more realistic approach at test
time. In the latter case, there are two ways of dealing with
the source activity detection problem. The ﬁrst is to employ
a source detection algorithm beforehand and then apply the
SSL method only on the signal portions with an active
source. For example, a voice activity detection (VAD) tech-
nique has been used in the SSL systems of Chang et al.
(2018); Kim and Hahn (2018) ; Li et al. (2016c); Sehgal and
Kehtarnavaz (2018) . The other way is to detect the activity
of the source at the same time as the localization algorithm.
For example, an additional neuron was added by Yalta et al.
(2017) to the output layer of their DNN, which outputted 1
when no source was active (in that case, all other localiza-
tion neurons were trained to output 0), and 0 otherwise.
Multi-source localization is a much more difﬁcult
problem than single-source SSL. Current state-of-the-art
DL-based methods address multi-source SSL in adverse
environments. In this survey, we consider multi-source
localization the scenario in which several sources overlap in
time (i.e., they are simultaneously emitting), regardless of
their type (e.g., there could be several speakers or several
distinct sound events). The speciﬁc case of a multi-speaker
conversation with or without speech overlap is strongly con-
nected to the speaker diarization problem (“who speaks
when?”) ( Anguera et al. , 2012 ; Park et al. , 2021b ; Tranter
and Reynolds, 2006 ). Speaker localization, diarization, and
(speech) source separation are intrinsically connected prob-
lems, as the information retrieved from solving each of them
can be useful for addressing the others ( Jenrungrot et al. ,
2020; Kounades-Bastian et al., 2017 ; Vincent et al., 2018 ).
An investigation of these connections is beyond the scope of
this survey.
In the multi-source scenario, the source detection prob-
lem transposes to a source counting problem, but the same
considerations as in the single-source scenario hold. In some
works, the knowledge of the NoS is a working hypothesis
(e.g., Bohlender et al., 2021 ; Fahim et al., 2020 ; Grumiaux
et al., 2021a ; Grumiaux et al., 2021b ; He et al., 2019a ; Ma
et al., 2015; Perotin et al., 2019b) and the sources’ DoA can
be directly estimated. If the NoS is unknown, one can apply
a source counting system beforehand, e.g., with a dedicated
DNN ( Grumiaux et al. , 2020 ). For example, Tian (2020)
trained a separate neural network to estimate the NoS in the
recorded mixture signal, after which he used this informa-
tion along with the output of the DoA estimation neural net-
work. Alternatively, the NoS can be estimated alongside the
DoAs, as in the single-source scenario, based on the SSL
network output. When using a classiﬁcation paradigm, the
network output generally predicts the probability of the
presence of a source within each discretized region of
the space (see Sec. VIII). One can thus set a threshold on
this estimated probability, which implicitly provides source
counting.1 Otherwise, the ground-truth or estimated NoS is
typically used to select the corresponding number of classes
having the highest probability.
Finally, several DNN-based systems were purposefully
designed to estimate the NoS alongside the DoAs. For
example, the method proposed by Nguyen et al. (2020a)
uses a neural architecture with two output branches: the ﬁrst
branch is used to estimate the NoS (up to four sources; the
problem is formulated as a classiﬁcation task), while the
second branch is used to classify the azimuth into several
regions. In the same spirit, we can mention the numerous
systems presented at the DCASE Challenge, in which the
SED task, jointly conducted with SSL, intrinsically provides
an estimate of the NoS. Note that many DCASE Challenge
candidate systems will be reviewed at the core of this
survey.
D. Moving sources
Source tracking is the problem of estimating the evolu-
tion of the sources’ position(s) over time, especially when
the sources are mobile. In this survey paper, we do not
address the problem of tracking on its own, which is usually
done in a separate algorithm using the sequence of DoA
estimates obtained by applying SSL on successive time
windows ( Vo et al.,2 0 1 5). Still, several DL-based SSL sys-
tems have been shown to produce more accurate localiza-
tion of moving sources when they were trained on a dataset
that includes this type of source ( Adavanne et al. ,2 0 1 9 b;
Diaz-Guerra et al. ,2 0 2 1 b; Guirguis et al. , 2020 ; He et al. ,
2021b). In other cases, as the number of real-world datasets
with moving sources is limited and the simulation of
signals with moving sources is cumbersome, a number of
systems trained on static sources have been shown to
retain fair to good performance for moving sources, e.g.,
(Grumiaux et al. ,2 0 2 1 a; Opochinsky et al. ,2 0 2 1; Sundar
et al.,2 0 2 0).
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 111
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


III. CONVENTIONAL SSL METHODS
Before the advent of DL, a set of signal processing tech-
niques were developed to address SSL. A detailed review of
these techniques was made by DiBiase et al. (2001).A
review in the speciﬁc robotics context was made by
Argentieri et al. (2015). In this section, we brieﬂy present
the most common conventional SSL methods. As brieﬂy
stated in the introduction, the reason for this is twofold: ﬁrst,
conventional SSL methods are often used as baselines for
DL-based methods; and second, many DL-based SSL meth-
ods use input features extracted with conventional methods
(see Sec. V).
When the geometry of the microphone array is known,
DoA estimation can be performed by estimating the time-
difference of arrival (TDoA) of the sources between the
microphones ( Xu et al., 2013 ). The generalized cross corre-
lation (CC) with phase transform (GCC-PHAT) is one of the
most employed method when dealing with a 2-microphone
array ( Knapp and Carter, 1976 ). It is computed as the
inverse Fourier transform of a weighted version of the cross-
power spectrum (CPS) between the signals of the two
microphones:
r1;2ðsÞ¼
XF/C0 1
f ¼0
X1ðf ÞX2ðf Þ/C3
jX1ðf ÞX2ðf Þ/C3 j ej2pðf s=NÞ; (5)
where Xiðf Þ are the N-point Fourier transform of the micro-
phone signals xiðtÞ, and X1ðf ÞX2ðf Þ/C3 is the CPS (* denotes
the complex conjugate). The TDoA estimate is then
obtained by ﬁnding the time delay between the microphone
signals that maximizes the GCC-PHAT function,
^s ¼ arg max
s
r1;2ðsÞ: (6)
The GCC approach has been extended to arrays with more
than two microphones, showing in particular that the localiza-
tion could be improved by taking advantage of the multiple
microphone pairs (Benestyet al., 2008; DiBiaseet al., 2001).
Building an acoustic power map PðxÞ, with x the spatial
coordinates, usually a regular grid, is another way to retrieve
the DoA of one or multiple sources, as local maxima of this
map mainly correspond to the sources’ DoA. The Steered-
Response Power (SRP) map has been extensively used: it
consists in pointing delay and sum beamformers towards
each of the candidate grid positions and measuring the
energy that arises from these directions. Its PHAT version,
which reveals more robust to reverberation, is certainly the
most popular. Practically, it can be derived from the average
of the GCC-PHAT computed on all microphone pairs
(DiBiase et al., 2001),
PðxÞ¼
XM
m1 ¼1
XM
m2 ¼m1 þ1
r1;2ðsm1 ;m2 ðxÞÞ; (7)
where sm1 ;m2 ðxÞ is the delay between the microphones m1
and m2 associated with the spatial position x.
An alternative to building the SRP-based acoustic
map—which happens to be computationally expensive as it
usually amounts to a grid search—is localization by exploit-
ing the sound intensity. The use of sound intensity for
source localization has a long history (e.g., Basten et al. ,
2008; Hickling et al., 1993; Jarrett et al., 2010; Nehorai and
Paldi, 1994 ; Raangs and Druyvesteyn, 2002 ; Tervo, 2009 ).
In favorable acoustic conditions, sound intensity is parallel
to the direction of the propagating sound wave (see Sec.
VE ), and hence the DoA can be efﬁciently estimated.
Unfortunately, its accuracy quickly degrades in the presence
of acoustic reﬂections ( Daniel and Kitic´, 2020 ).
Subspace methods are another classical family of locali-
zation algorithms. These methods rely on the computation
of the (time-averaged) CPS matrix Rðf Þ deﬁned by
Rðf Þ¼
XN
n¼1
Xðf ; nÞXðf ; nÞH ; (8)
where Xðf ; nÞ is the STFT (or more generally a local discrete
Fourier transform) of the multichannel signal vector deﬁned
in Eq. (4) (H denotes the Hermitian operator), and its eigen-
value decomposition (EVD). Assuming that the target source
signals and noise are uncorrelated, the multiple signal classi-
ﬁcation (MUSIC) method ( Schmidt, 1986 ) applies EVD to
estimate the signal and noise subspaces. After Eq. (4),t h e
signal subspace bases are assumed to correspond to the col-
umns of the mixing matrix Aðf Þ, which are the multichannel
ATFs of the sources (often referred to as steering vectors in
this context). The signal or noise subspace bases are then
used to probe a given direction for the presence of a source,
i.e., apply spatial ﬁltering or beamforming (Benesty et al. ,
2008; Van Veen and Buckley, 1988 ). This time-demanding
search can be relaxed using the Estimation of Signal
Parameters via Rotational Invariance Technique (ESPRIT)
algorithm (Roy and Kailath, 1989 ), which exploits the struc-
ture of the source subspace to directly infer the source DoA.
However, this often comes at the cost of producing less accu-
rate predictions than MUSIC (Mabande et al.,2 0 1 1). MUSIC
and ESPRIT assume narrowband signals, although wideband
extensions have been proposed (e.g., Dmochowski et al. ,
2007; Hogg et al. ,2 0 2 1). Subspace methods are robust to
noise and can produce highly accurate estimates, but they are
sensitive to reverberation.
Methods based on probabilistic generative mixture
models have been proposed by, e.g., Dorfan and Gannot
(2015); Li et al. (2017); Mandel et al. (2009); May et al.
(2011); Roman and Wang (2008) ; Schwartz and Gannot
(2013); Woodruff and Wang (2012) . Typically, the models
are variants of Gaussian mixture models (GMMs), with one
Gaussian component per source to be localized or per candi-
date source position. In very few papers (e.g., May et al. ,
2011), the model is trained ofﬂine with a dedicated training
dataset. But most often, the model parameters are directly
estimated “at test time,” that is using the multichannel signal
containing the sources to localize. This is done by maximiz-
ing the data likelihood function with histogram-based or
112 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


expectation-maximization (EM) algorithms exploiting the
sparsity of sound sources in the TF domain ( Rickard, 2002),
which can be computationally intensive. A GMM variant
functioning directly in regression mode, i.e., a form of
Gaussian mixture regression (GMR), was proposed for
single-source localization by Deleforge and Horaud (2012)
and later extended to multi-source localization (and possibly
separation) ( Deleforge et al. , 2013 , 2015). The GMR is
locally linear but globally non-linear and the estimation of
the model parameters is done ofﬂine on training data. Hence
the spirit is close to DNN-based SSL. White noise signals
convolved with synthetic RIRs were used for training. The
method was shown to generalize well to speech signals,
which are sparser than noise in the TF domain, thanks to the
use of a latent variable modeling the signal activity in each
TF bin.
Mixture models are strongly connected to Bayesian
inference, which considers the posterior distribution of
model parameters given the observed data (hence involving
both the likelihood function and a prior distribution of the
model parameters). Escolano et al. (2014) considered apply-
ing Bayesian inference on a Laplacian source mixture
model, using GCC-PHAT features in a two-microphone
array set-up. Interestingly, they used two levels of Bayesian
inference: one for the estimation of the NoS (which is an
hyper-parameter of the model), using Bayesian model selec-
tion, and one for the estimation of the model parameters
(and thus the corresponding source DoAs), using posterior
distribution evaluation. In this work, the evaluation of the
involved distributions was done with sampling techniques,
e.g., Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. The
same methodology was further applied by Bush and Xiang
(2018) with a coprime array consisting of two superim-
posed, spatially undersampled, uniform linear arrays
(Vaidyanathan and Pal, 2010 ), and by Landschoot and
Xiang (2019) in the spherical harmonics (SH) domain using
a spherical microphone array (see Sec. V).
Compressive sensing and sparse recovery methods are
widely used in acoustics for different purposes ( Gerstoft
et al. , 2018 ; Xenaki et al. , 2014 ), including SSL ( Yang
et al. , 2018 ). The main premise is that many high-
dimensional signals admit a low-dimensional representation,
which can be viewed through, e.g., sparse synthesis (Candes
et al. , 2006 )o r sparse analysis (Nam et al. , 2013 ) model.
Concerning the SSL problem, the sparsity assumption is
usually assumed in the spatial (or spatial beam) domain
(e.g., Chardon and Daudet, 2012 ; Fortunati et al. , 2014 ;
Gerstoft et al., 2016 ; Kitic´ et al., 2014 ; Noohi et al., 2013 ),
and the resulting problem is addressed by convex optimiza-
tion, greedy or Bayesian methods (e.g., Foucart and Rauhut,
2013; Gerstoft et al., 2018 ). This concept has led to promi-
nent localization methods achieving remarkable perfor-
mance. Nonetheless, despite their strong theoretical
guarantees, compressive sensing methods suffer from two
drawbacks. For one, it is usually required that the sources
coincide with points of some pre-deﬁned grid, although
grid-free methods have been proposed in some speciﬁc
cases (e.g., Xenaki and Gerstoft, 2015 ; Yang and Xie,
2015). The second issue is shared with other conventional
methods, i.e., the strong modeling assumptions reﬂected in,
for example, the known structure of the (sub-Gaussian) dic-
tionary matrix. Dictionary learning techniques have been
proposed to alleviate the latter problem to some extent (e.g.,
Hahmann et al. , 2021b ; Wang et al. , 2018 ; Zea and
Laudato, 2021). Sparse Bayesian learning (SBL) is a combi-
nation of the Bayesian framework with the principles of
sparse representations and compressed sensing. It usually
involves using sparse arrays such as the coprime array men-
tioned previously and nested arrays ( Pal and Vaidyanathan,
2010). SBL has been used for SSL by, e.g., Gerstoft et al.
(2016); Liu et al. (2012); Nannuru et al. (2018); Ping et al.
(2020); Xenaki et al. (2018); Zhang et al. (2014).
Finally, ICA is a class of algorithms aimed at retrieving
the different source signals comprising a mixture by assum-
ing and exploiting their mutual statistical independence.
ICA has most often been used in audio processing for blind
source separation, but it has also proven to be useful for
multi-source SSL ( Sawada et al. , 2003 ). As brieﬂy stated
before, in the multi-source scenario, SSL is closely related
to the source separation problem, since localization can help
separation, and separation can help localization ( Gannot
et al., 2017; Vincent et al., 2018).
IV . NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURES FOR SSL
In this section, we discuss the neural network architec-
tures that have been proposed in the literature to address the
SSL problem. However, we do not present the basics of
these neural networks since they have been extensively
described in the general DL literature (e.g., Chollet, 2017 ;
Goodfellow et al., 2016 ; LeCun et al., 2015). The design of
DNNs for a given application often requires investigating
(and possibly combining) different architectures and tuning
their hyperparameters. This was the case for SSL over the
last decade, and the evolution of DL-based SSL techniques
has followed the general evolution of DNNs toward more
and more complex architectures or new efﬁcient models
adopted by the DL and SP communities at large, i.e., largely
beyond the SSL problem (e.g., attention models). In other
words, the DNN architectures used in SSL are often inher-
ited from other works in other (connected or more distant)
domains, simply because they were shown to work well on
audio signals or other types or signals. In the same spirit,
different models are often combined (in parallel and/or
sequentially).
We have thus organized the presentation according to
the type of layers used in the networks, with a progressive
and “inclusive” approach in terms of complexity: a network
within a given category can contain layers from another pre-
viously presented category. We thus ﬁrst present systems
based on feedforward neural networks (FFNNs). We then
focus on CNNs and recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
which generally incorporate some feedforward layers. Next,
we review architectures combining CNNs with RNNs,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 113
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


namely, convolutional recurrent neural networks (CRNNs).
Then, we focus on neural networks with residual connec-
tions and with attention mechanisms. Finally, we present
SSL systems with an encoder-decoder architecture.
A. FFNNs
The FFNN was the ﬁrst and simplest type of artiﬁcial
neural network to be designed. In such a network, data
move in one direction from the input layer to the output
layer, possibly via a series of hidden layers ( Goodfellow
et al., 2016; LeCun et al., 2015). Non-linear activation func-
tions are usually used after each layer (possibly except for
the output layer). While this deﬁnition of FFNN is very gen-
eral and may include architectures such as CNNs (discussed
in the next subsection), here we mainly focus on architec-
tures made of fully-connected layers known as Perceptron
and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) ( Goodfellow et al. ,
2016; LeCun et al. , 2015 ). A Perceptron has no hidden
layer, while the notion of MLP is a bit ambiguous: some
authors state that an MLP has one hidden layer, while others
allow more hidden layers. In this paper, we call an MLP an
FFNN with one or more hidden layers.
A few pioneering SSL methods using shallow neural
networks (Perceptron or 1-hidden layer MLP) and applied in
“unrealistic” setups (e.g., assuming direct-path sound propa-
gation only) have been brieﬂy mentioned in Sec. II A. One
of the ﬁrst uses of an MLP for SSL was proposed by Kim
and Ling (2011) , who actually considered several MLPs.
One network estimates the NoS, after which a distinct net-
work is used for SSL for each considered NoS. The authors
evaluated their method on reverberant data even though
they assumed an anechoic setting. Tsuzuki et al. (2013) pro-
posed using a complex-valued MLP in order to process
complex two-microphone-based features, which led to better
results than using a real-valued MLP. Youssef et al. (2013)
also used an MLP to estimate the azimuth of a sound source
from a binaural recording made with a robot head. The inter-
aural time difference (ITD) and the interaural level differ-
ence (ILD) values (see Sec. V) were separately fed into the
input layer and were each processed by a speciﬁc set of neu-
rons. A single-hidden-layer MLP was used by Xiao et al.
(2015), taking GCC-PHAT-based features as inputs and
tackling SSL as a classiﬁcation problem (see Sec. VIII),
which showed an improvement over conventional methods
on simulated and real data. A similar approach was pro-
posed by Vesperini et al. (2016), but the localization was
done by regression in the horizontal plane.
Naturally, MLPs with deeper architecture (i.e., more
hidden layers) have also been investigated for SSL. Roden
et al. (2015) compared the performance of an MLP with two
hidden layers and different input types, the number of hid-
den neurons being linked to the type of input features (see
Sec. V for more details). Yiwere and Rhee (2017) used an
MLP with three hidden layers (tested with different numbers
of neurons) to output source azimuth and distance estimates.
An MLP with four hidden layers was tested by He et al.
(2018a) for multi-source localization and speech/non-speech
classiﬁcation, showing similar results as a 4-layer CNN (see
Sec. IV B).
Ma et al. (2015) proposed using a different MLP for
different frequency sub-bands, with each MLP having eight
hidden layers. This idea is based on the assumption that, in
the presence of multiple sources, each frequency band is
mostly dominated by a single source, which enables the
training to be done exclusively on single-source data. The
output of each sub-band MLP corresponds to a probability
distribution on azimuth regions, and the ﬁnal azimuth esti-
mations are obtained by integrating the probability values
over the frequency bands. Another system in the same vein
was proposed by Takeda et al. in several papers ( Takeda
and Komatani, 2016a ,b, 2017; Takeda et al., 2018). In these
works, the eigenvectors of the recorded signal interchannel
correlation matrix were separately fed per frequency band
into parallel branches of the network, particularly into
speciﬁc fully-connected layers. Then, several additional fully-
connected layers progressively integrated the frequency-
dependent outputs (see Fig. 2). The authors showed that
this speciﬁc architecture outperforms a more conventional
7-layer MLP and the classical MUSIC algorithm on
anechoic and reverberant single- and multi-source signals.
Opochinsky et al. (2019) proposed a small 3-layer MLP to
estimate the azimuth of a single source using the relative
transfer function (RTF, see Sec. VA1 ) of the signal. Their
approach is weakly supervised since one part of the loss
function is computed without the ground truth DoA labels
(see Sec. VIII).
An indirect use of an MLP was explored by Pak and
Shin (2019) , who used a 3-layer MLP to enhance the inter-
aural phase difference (IPD) (see Sec. V) of the input signal,
which was then used for DoA estimation.
B. Convolutional neural networks
CNNs are a popular class of DNNs widely used for pat-
tern recognition due to their property of being translation
equivariant ( Cohen et al. , 2019 ; Goodfellow et al. , 2016 ).
They have been successfully applied to various tasks, such
as image classiﬁcation (e.g., Krizhevsky et al., 2017 ), natu-
ral language processing (NLP) (e.g., Kim, 2014 ), or auto-
matic speech recognition (e.g., Waibel et al., 1989 ). CNNs
have also been used for SSL, as detailed below.
To our knowledge, Hirvonen (2015) was the ﬁrst to use
a CNN for SSL. He employed this architecture to classify an
audio signal containing one speech or musical source into
one of eight spatial regions (see Fig. 3). This CNN is com-
posed of four convolutional layers to extract feature maps
from multichannel magnitude spectrograms (see Sec. V),
followed by four fully-connected layers for classiﬁcation.
Classical pooling is not used because, according to the
author, it does not seem relevant for audio representations.
Instead, a 4-tap stride with a 2-tap overlap is used to reduce
the number of parameters. This approach shows good per-
formance on single-source signals and is capable of adapting
114 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


to different conﬁgurations without hand-engineering.
However, two topical issues of such a system were pointed
out by the author: the robustness of the network with respect
to a shift in source location, and the difﬁculty of interpreting
the hidden features.
Chakrabarty and Habets also designed a CNN to predict
the azimuth of one ( Chakrabarty and Habets, 2017a )o rt w o
(Chakrabarty and Habets, 2017b , 2019b) speakers in rever-
berant environments. The input features are the multichannel
STFT phase spectrograms (see Sec. V). In Chakrabarty and
Habets (2017a), they proposed using three successive convo-
lutional layers with 64 ﬁlters of size 2 /C2 2 to consider neigh-
boring frequency bands and microphones. In Chakrabarty
and Habets (2017b), they reduced the ﬁlter size to 2 /C2 1( 1i n
the frequency axis) because of the W-disjoint orthogonality
(WDO) assumption for speech signals, which assumes that
several speakers are not simultaneously active in a same TF
bin ( Rickard, 2002 ). In Chakrabarty and Habets (2019b) ,
FIG. 2. (Color online) The MLP architecture used by Takeda et al. in several papers ( Takeda and Komatani, 2016a ,b, 2017; Takeda et al., 2018). Multiple
subband feedforward layers, indexed by w, are trained to extract features from the CPS matrix eigenvectors ew;i, which are used as directional activation
functions. The obtained subband vectors X2;w are integrated across subbands progressively via other feedforward layers, giving X3;w and then X4. The output
layer ﬁnally classiﬁes its input in one of the candidate DoAs (the entries of the vector X5). Note: Reprinted from Takeda and Komatani (2016a) . Copyright
by IEEE; reprinted with permission.
FIG. 3. (Color online) The CNN architecture proposed by Hirvonen (2015) for SSL. The input is an 8-channel signal. For each short-term frame, the 8 mag-
nitude spectra (of 128 frequency bins) are concatenated to form a 1024 /C2 1 tensor, which is fed into a series of four convolutional layers with 500 or 600
learnable kernels. The extracted features then pass through several feedforward layers containing 500 or 300 neurons. The output layer contains eig ht neu-
rons (or 16 if the source type is also considered) and estimates the probability of a source being present in eight candidate DoAs using a softmax activa tion
function. Note: Reprinted from Hirvonen (2015); copyright by the author; reprinted with permission.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 115
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


they demonstrated that for an M-microphone array, the opti-
mal number of convolutional layers for exploiting phase cor-
relations between the neighboring microphones is M –1 .
He et al. (2018a) compared a 4-layer MLP and a 4-
layer CNN for the multi-speaker detection and localization
task. The results showed similar accuracy for both architec-
tures. A deeper architecture was proposed by Yalta et al.
(2017), with 11 to 20 convolutional layers depending on the
experiments. These deeper CNNs showed robustness against
noise compared to MUSIC, as well as smaller training time,
but this was partly due to the presence of residual blocks
(see Sec. IV E). A similar architecture was presented by He
et al. (2018b), with many convolutional layers and some
residual blocks, although with a speciﬁc multi-task conﬁgu-
ration. The end of the network was split into two convolu-
tional branches, one for azimuth estimation, and the other
for speech/non-speech signal classiﬁcation.
While most localization systems aim to estimate the
azimuth or both the azimuth and elevation, Thuillier et al.
(2018) investigated the estimation of only the elevation
angle using a CNN with binaural input features: the ipsilat-
eral and contralateral head-related transfer function (HRTF)
magnitude responses (see Sec. V). Vera-Diaz et al. (2018)
chose to apply a CNN directly on raw multichannel wave-
forms, assembled side by side as an image, to predict the
Cartesian coordinates ( x, y, z) of a single static or moving
speaker. The successive convolutional layers contain around
a hundred ﬁlters from size 7 /C2 7 for the ﬁrst layers to 3 /C2 3
for the last layer. Ma and Liu (2018) also used a CNN to
perform regression, but they used the CPS matrix as an input
feature (see Sec. V). To estimate both the azimuth and ele-
vation, Nguyen et al. (2018) used a relatively small CNN
(two convolutional layers) in regression mode, with binaural
input features. A similar approach was considered by
Sivasankaran et al. (2018) for speaker localization based on
a CNN. They showed that injecting a speaker identiﬁer, par-
ticularly a mask estimated for the speaker uttering a given
keyword, alongside the binaural features at the input layer
improved the DoA estimation.
A joint VAD and DoA estimation CNN was developed
by Vecchiotti et al. (2018). They showed that both problems
can be handled jointly in a multi-room environment using
the same architecture, although considering separate input
features (GCC-PHAT and log-mel-spectrograms) in two
separate input branches. These branches are then
concatenated in a further layer. Vecchiotti et al. (2019b)
extended this work by exploring several variant architec-
tures and experimental conﬁgurations, and Vecchiotti et al.
(2019a) developed an end-to-end auditory-inspired system
based on a CNN, with Gammatone ﬁlter layers included in
the neural architecture. A method based on mask estimation
was proposed by Zhang et al. (2019b), in which a TF mask
was estimated and used to either clean or be appended to the
input features, facilitating the DoA estimation by a CNN.
Nguyen et al. (2020a) presented a multi-task CNN con-
taining ten convolutional layers with average pooling, infer-
ring both the NoS and the sources’ DoA. They evaluated
their network on signals with up to four sources, showing
very good performance in both simulated and real environ-
ments. A small 3-layer CNN was employed by Varanasi
et al. (2020) to infer both azimuth and elevation using sig-
nals decomposed with third-order SH (see Sec. V). The
authors tried several combinations of input features, includ-
ing using only the magnitude and/or the phase of the spheri-
cal harmonic decomposition.
In the context of hearing aids, a CNN was applied to
both VAD and DoA estimation by Varzandeh et al. (2020).
This system is based on two input features, GCC-PHAT
and periodicity degree, both fed separately into two convo-
lutional branches. These two branches are then
concatenated in a further layer, which is followed by feed-
forward layers. Fahim et al. (2020) applied an 8-layer CNN
to the so-called modal coherence of ﬁrst-order Ambisonics
input features (see Sec. V) for the localization of multiple
sources in a reverberant environment. They proposed a new
method to train a multi-source DoA estimation network
with only single-source training data, showing an improve-
ment over the system of Chakrabarty and Habets (2019b) ,
especially for signals with three speakers. Hao et al. (2020)
investigated a real-time implementation of SSL using a
CNN with a relatively small architecture (three convolu-
tional layers).
Krause et al. (2020a) investigated the use of several
types of convolution. They reported that networks using
three-dimensional (3D) convolutions (on the time, fre-
quency, and channel axes) achieved better localization accu-
racy compared to those based on two-dimensional (2D)
convolutions, complex convolutions, and depth-wise separa-
ble convolutions (all of them on the time and frequency
axes), but with a high computational cost. They also showed
that the use of depth-wise separable convolutions leads to a
good trade-off between accuracy and model complexity (to
our knowledge, they were the ﬁrst to explore this type of
convolutions).
Bologni et al. (2021) proposed a neural network archi-
tecture including a set of 2D convolutional layers for frame-
wise feature extraction, followed by several one-dimensional
(1D) convolutional layers in the time dimension for temporal
aggregation. Diaz-Guerra et al. (2021b) applied 3D convolu-
tional layers on SRP-PHAT power maps computed for both
azimuth and elevation estimation. They also used a couple of
1D causal convolutional layers at the end of the network to
perform single-source tracking. Their whole architecture was
designed to function in fully causal mode so that it can be
adapted for real-time applications. Wu et al. (2021a) pro-
posed using a supervised image mapping approach inspired
from computer vision works and referred to as image transla-
tion. They used a CNN (completed with residual layers, see
Sec. IV E) to map an input 2D image [DoA features extracted
by conventional beamforming and reshaped as a function of
Cartesian coordinates ( x, y)] into an output 2D image of the
target source position (in which the pixel intensity is decreas-
ing rapidly with the distance to the source), from which the
source location is obtained.
116 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


As mentioned in the introduction, the DCASE
Challenge includes a SELD task, and CNNs have also been
used in some of the challenge candidate systems ( Politis
et al., 2020b). Chytas and Potamianos (2019) used convolu-
tional layers with hundreds of ﬁlters of size 4 /C2 10 for azi-
muth and elevation estimation in a regression mode. Kong
et al. (2019) compared different numbers of convolutional
layers for SELD, while an 8-layer CNN was proposed by
Noh et al. (2019) to improve the results over the baseline.
An indirect use of a CNN was proposed by Salvati et al.
(2018). They trained the neural network to estimate a weight
for each of the narrow-band SRP components fed at the
input layer in order to compute a weighted combination of
these components. In their experiments, they showed on a
few test examples that this allowed for a better fusion of the
narrow-band components and reduced the effects of noise
and reverberation, leading to better localization accuracy.
In the DoA estimation literature, a few works have
explored the use of dilated convolutions in DNNs. Dilated
convolutions, also known as atrous convolutions, are a type
of convolutional layer in which the convolution kernel is
wider than the classical one but zeros are inserted so that the
number of parameters remains the same. Formally, a 1D
dilated convolution with a dilation factor l is deﬁned by
ðx /C3 kÞðnÞ¼
X
i
xðn /C0 liÞkðiÞ; (9)
where x is the input and k the convolution kernel. The con-
ventional linear convolution is obtained with l ¼ 1. This def-
inition extends to multidimensional convolution.
Chakrabarty and Habets (2019a) demonstrate that incor-
porating dilated convolutions with gradually increasing dila-
tion factors reduces the optimal number of convolutional
layers of their original CNN architecture ( Chakrabarty and
Habets, 2019b ) (discussed previously in this section). This
leads to an architecture with similar SSL performance and
lower computational cost.
C. RNNs
RNNs are neural networks designed for modeling tem-
poral sequences of data ( Goodfellow et al. , 2016 ; LeCun
et al. , 2015 ). Particular types of RNNs include long short-
term memory (LSTM) cells ( Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997) and gated recurrent units (GRUs) ( Cho et al., 2014 ).
These two types of RNNs have become very popular thanks
to their capability to circumvent the training difﬁculties that
regular RNNs face, in particular the vanishing and explod-
ing gradient problems ( Goodfellow et al. , 2016 ; LeCun
et al., 2015).
There are few published works on SSL using only
RNNs, as recurrent layers are often combined with convolu-
tional layers (see Sec. IV D). Nguyen et al. (2021a) used an
RNN to align SED and DoA predictions, which were
obtained separately for each possible sound event type. The
RNN was ultimately used to determine which SED predic-
tion matched which DoA estimation. A bidirectional LSTM
network was used by Wang et al. (2019) to estimate a TF
mask to enhance the signal, further facilitating DoA estima-
tion by conventional methods such as SRP or subspace
methods.
D. CRNNs
CRNNs are neural networks containing one or more
convolutional layers and one or more recurrent layers.
CRNNs have been regularly exploited for SSL since 2018
because of the respective capabilities of these layers: The
convolutional layers have proven to be suitable for extract-
ing relevant features for SSL, and the recurrent layers are
well designed for integrating the information over time.
In the series of papers by Adavanne et al. (Adavanne
et al. , 2019a , 2018, 2019b), the authors used a CRNN for
SELD, in a multi-task conﬁguration, with ﬁrst-order
Ambisonics (FOA) input features (see Sec. V). In Adavanne
et al. (2018), their architecture contained a series of succes-
sive convolutional layers, each followed by a max-pooling
layer and two bidirectional gated recurrent unit (BGRU)
layers. Then, a feedforward layer provided an estimation of
the spatial pseudo-spectrum (SPS) provided by the MUSIC
algorithm (Schmidt, 1986), acting as an intermediary output
(see Fig. 4). This SPS was then fed into the second part of
the neural network, which was composed of two convolu-
tional layers, a dense layer, two BGRU layers, and a ﬁnal
feedforward layer for azimuth and elevation estimation by
classiﬁcation. The use of an intermediary SPS output has
been proposed to help the neural network learn a representa-
tion that has proven to be useful for SSL using traditional
methods.
In Adavanne et al. (2019a) and Adavanne et al.
(2019b), this intermediary output was no longer used.
Instead, the DoA was directly estimated using a block of
convolutional layers, a block of BGRU layers, and a feed-
forward layer. This system is able to localize and detect sev-
eral sound events even if they overlap in time, provided they
are of different types (e.g., speech and car, see the discus-
sion in Sec. II B). This CRNN was the baseline system for
Task 3 of the DCASE Challenge in 2019 and 2020.
Therefore, it has inspired many other works, and many
DCASE Challenge candidate systems were built on the sys-
tem of Adavanne et al. (2019a) with various modiﬁcations
and improvements.
For example, Lin and Wang (2019) added Gaussian
noise to the input spectrograms to train the network to be
more robust to noise. Lu (2019) integrated some additional
convolutional layers and replaced the BGRU layers with
bidirectional LSTM layers. Leung and Ren (2019) used the
same architecture with all combinations of cross-channel
power spectra, whereas the replacement of input features
with group delays was tested by Nustede and Anem €uller
(2019). GCC-PHAT features were added as input features
by Maruri et al. (2019). Zhang et al. (2019a) used data aug-
mentation during training and averaged the output of the
network for a more stable DoA estimation. Xue et al. (2019)
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 117
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


sent the input features separately into different branches of
convolutional layers, log-mel, and constant Q-transform
features on the one hand, and phase spectrograms and CPS
features on the other hand (see Sec. V). Cao et al. (2019b)
concatenated the log-mel spectrogram and GCC-PHAT
features and fed them into two separate CRNNs for SED
and DoA estimation (they also incorporated the intensity
vector in Cao et al. , 2019a ). In contrast to the baseline of
Adavanne et al. (2019a) , more convolutional layers and
one single BGRU layer were used. The convolutional part
of the DoA network was transferred from the SED CRNN,
which was followed by ﬁne-tuning of the DoA branch,
labelling this method as two-stage . This led to a notable
improvement in localization performance over the
DCASE Challenge baseline of Adavanne et al. (2019a) .
Small changes to this baseline were also tested by Pratik
et al. (2019), such as the use of Bark-scale spectrograms
as input features, the modiﬁcation of the activation func-
tion or pooling layers, and the use of data augmentation,
resulting in noticeable improvements for some
experiments.
The same baseline neural architecture of Adavanne
et al. (2019a) was used by Kapka and Lewandowski (2019) ,
with one separate (but identical, except for the output layer)
CRNN instance for each subtask: source counting (up to two
sources), DoA estimation of source 1 (if applicable), DoA
estimation of source 2 (if applicable), and sound type classi-
ﬁcation. The authors showed that their method was more
efﬁcient than the baseline. Krause and Kowalczyk (2019)
explored different manners of splitting the SED and DoA
estimation tasks in a CRNN. While some conﬁgurations
showed an improvement in SED, the localization accuracy
was below the baseline for the reported experiments. Park
et al. (2019b) investigated a combination of a gated linear
unit (GLU, a convolutional block with a gated mechanism)
and a trellis network (containing convolutional and recurrent
layers, see the paper by Bai et al. (2019) for details), yield-
ing better results than the baseline. The authors extended
this work for the DCASE 2020 Challenge by improving the
overall architecture and investigating other loss functions
(Park et al. , 2020 ). A non-direct DoA estimation scheme
was also derived by Grondin et al. (2019), who estimated
the TDoA using a CRNN, from which they inferred the
DoA.
We also found propositions of CRNN-based systems in
the 2020 edition of the DCASE Challenge. Singla et al.
(2020) used the same CRNN as in the baseline of Adavanne
et al. (2019a), except that they did not use two separated
output branches for SED and DoA estimation. Instead, they
concatenated the SED output with the output of the previous
layer to estimate the DoA. Song (2020) used separated neu-
ral networks similar to the one of Adavanne et al. (2019a) to
address NoS estimation and DoA estimation in a sequential
way. Multiple CRNNs were trained by Tian (2020) : one to
estimate the NoS (up to two sources), another to estimate
the DoA assuming one active source, and another (same as
the baseline) to estimate the DoAs of two simultaneously
active sources. Cao et al. (2020) designed an end-to-end
FIG. 4. (Color online) The CRNN architecture of Adavanne et al. (2019a), Adavanne et al. (2019b), and Adavanne et al. (2018), which has inspired numer-
ous SELD systems. The input is the multichannel STFT-domain FOA magnitude and phase spectrogram. First, features are extracted by four successive co n-
volutional layers with sixty-four 3 /C2 3 kernels, each followed by a max-pooling layer. Then two BGRU layers with 64 units each and tanh activations are
used to capture the temporal evolution of the extracted features. An intermediate SPS output is then computed using a time distributed feedforward la yer
(i.e., this layer is computed separately on each vector of the temporal axis). Then, two 16-kernel convolution layers followed by a 32-unit time distr ibuted
feedfoward layer and two 16-units BGRU layers process the estimated SPS. A ﬁnal 432-unit time distributed feedforward layer with sigmoid activation
function is employed to infer the DoA. Note: Reprinted from Adavanne et al. (2018); copyright by IEEE; reprinted with permission.
118 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


CRNN architecture to detect and estimate the DoA of possi-
bly two instances of the same sound event. The addition of
1D convolutional ﬁlters was investigated by Ronchini et al.
(2020) to exploit the information along the feature axes.
Sampathkumar and Kowerko (2020) augmented the baseline
system of Adavanne et al. (2019a) by providing the network
with more input features (log-mel spectrograms, GCC-
PHAT, and intensity vector, see Sec. V).
Independently of the DCASE Challenge, the CRNN of
Adavanne et al. (2019a) was adapted by Comminiello et al.
(2019) to receive quaternion FOA input features, which
slightly improved the CRNN performance. Perotin et al.
proposed using a CRNN with bidirectional LSTM layers on
the FOA pseudo-intensity vector to localize one ( Perotin
et al., 2018b ) or two ( Perotin et al., 2019b ) speakers. They
showed that this architecture achieves very good perfor-
mance in simulated and real reverberant environments with
static speakers (both types of input features are discussed in
Sec. V). This work was extended by Grumiaux et al.
(2021a), who obtained a substantial improvement in perfor-
mance over the CRNN of Perotin et al. (2019b) by adding
more convolutional layers with less max-pooling, to localize
up to three simultaneous speakers.
Non-square convolutional ﬁlters and a unidirectional
LSTM layer were used in the CRNN architecture of Li et al.
(2018). Xue et al. (2020) presented a CRNN with two types
of input features: the phase of the CPS and the signal wave-
forms. The former was ﬁrst processed by a series of convo-
lutional layers before being concatenated with the latter.
Another improvement of the network of Adavanne et al.
(2019a) was proposed by Komatsu et al. (2020), who
replaced the classical convolutional blocks with GLUs,
based on the hypothesis that GLUs are better suited for
extracting relevant features from phase spectrograms. This
has led to a notable improvement of localization perfor-
mance compared to the baseline of Adavanne et al. (2019a).
Bohlender et al. (2021) proposed an extension of the system
of Chakrabarty and Habets (2019b) , in which LSTMs and
temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) replaced the last
dense layer of the former architecture. A TCN was made of
successive 1D dilated causal convolutional layers with
increasing dilated factors ( Lea et al. , 2017 ). The authors
showed that taking the temporal context into account with
such temporal layers actually improves the localization
accuracy.
Finally, we can mention the original approach of
Nguyen et al. (2020c) in which a two-step hybrid approach
with two CRNNs is used: In the ﬁrst step, a ﬁrst CRNN is
used for SED and a single-source histogram-based (conven-
tional) method is used for DoA estimation. In the second
step, a second CRNN-based network, referred to as
sequence matching network (SMN), is used to match the
estimated sequences from the SED and DoA branches. This
approach is motivated by the fact that overlapping sounds
often have different onsets and offsets, and by matching the
outputs of the two branches, an estimated DoA can be asso-
ciated with the corresponding sound class. This approach
was extended to localize moving sources in the framework
of the DCASE 2020 Challenge, by adapting the resolution
of the azimuth and elevation histograms and by using an
ensemble of SMNs ( Nguyen et al., 2020b).
E. Residual neural networks
Residual neural networks were originally introduced by
He et al. (2016), who pointed out that designing very deep
networks can lead the gradients to explode or vanish due to
the non-linear activation functions, as well as the degrada-
tion of the overall performance. Residual connections are
designed to enable a feature to bypass a layer block in paral-
lel to the conventional process through this layer block. This
allows the gradients to ﬂow directly through the network,
usually leading to a better training.
To our knowledge, the ﬁrst use of a network with resid-
ual connections for SSL was proposed by Yalta et al.
(2017). As illustrated in Fig. 5, this network includes three
residual blocks, which are stacks of layers with one of the
layers having residual connections with another layer deeper
in the stack. Each of these blocks is made of three convolu-
tional layers, the ﬁrst and last of which are designed with
1 /C2 1 ﬁlters, with the middle layer designed with 3 /C2 3 ﬁl-
ters. A residual connection is used between the input and
output of each residual block. The same type of residual
block was used for SSL by He et al. (2018b, 2019a) in paral-
lel to sound classiﬁcation as speech or non-speech. Suvorov
et al. (2018) used a series of 1D convolutional layers with
several residual connections for single-source localization,
directly from the multichannel waveform.
Pujol et al. (2019, 2021) integrated residual connections
alongside 1D dilated convolutional layers with increasing
dilation factors. They used the multichannel waveform as
the network input. After the input layer, the architecture was
divided into several subnetworks containing the dilated con-
volutional layers, which functioned as ﬁlter banks. Ranjan
et al. (2019) combined a modiﬁed version of the original
ResNet architecture ( He et al. , 2016 ) with recurrent layers
for SELD. This was shown to reduce the DoA error by more
than 20 8 compared to the baseline of Adavanne et al.
(2019a). Similarly, Bai et al. (2021) also used the ResNet
model of ( He et al., 2016) followed by two GRU layers and
two fully-connected layers for SELD. Kujawski et al.
(2019) also adopted the original ResNet architecture and
applied it to the single-source localization problem.
Another interesting architecture containing residual
connections was proposed by Naranjo-Alcazar et al. (2020)
for the DCASE 2020 Challenge. Before the recurrent layers
(consisting of two BGRUs), three residual blocks succes-
sively processed the input features. These residual blocks
contained two residual convolutional layers, followed by a
squeeze-excitation module ( Hu et al., 2020). These modules
aim to improve the modeling of interdependencies between
input feature channels compared to classical convolutional
layers. Similar squeeze-excitation mechanisms were used by
Sundar et al. (2020) for multi-source localization. Another
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 119
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


combination of a residual network with squeeze-excitation
blocks was reported by Huang and Perez (2021) , who imple-
mented it in the framework of a sample-level CNN (i.e., a
CNN applied on the time-domain signal samples) ( Lee
et al. , 2017 ). The resulting blocks are further followed by
two Conformer blocks (see the next subsection). The moti-
vation for combining these different models was their
observed effectiveness in other audio processing tasks such
as SED.
Shimada et al. (2020b, 2020a) adapted the
MMDenseLSTM architecture, originally proposed by
Takahashi et al. (2018) for sound source separation, to the
SELD problem. This architecture consists of a series of
blocks made of convolutions and recurrent layers with resid-
ual connections. Their system showed very good perfor-
mance among the other participants to the DCASE 2020
Challenge. Wang et al. (2020) used an ensemble learning
approach in which several variants of residual neural net-
works and recurrent layers were trained to estimate the
DoA, achieving the best performance of the DCASE 2020
Challenge.
Guirguis et al. (2020) designed a neural network with a
TCN in addition to classical 2D convolutions and residual
connections. Instead of using recurrent layers as usually
considered, the architecture was composed of TCN blocks
that were made of several residual blocks, including a 1D
dilated convolutional layer with an increasing dilated factor.
The authors showed that replacing recurrent layers with
TCNs made the hardware implementation of the network
more efﬁcient while slightly improving the SELD perfor-
mance compared to the baseline of Adavanne et al. (2019a).
Yasuda et al. (2020) exploited a CRNN with residual
connections in an indirect way for DoA estimation using an
FOA pseudo-intensity vector input (see Sec. VE ). A CRNN
was ﬁrst used to remove the reverberant part of the FOA
pseudo-intensity vector, after which another CRNN was
used to estimate a TF mask, which was applied to attenuate
TF bins with a large amount of noise. The source DoA was
ﬁnally estimated directly from the dereverberated and
denoised pseudo-intensity vector.
F. Attention-based neural networks
An attention mechanism is a method that allows a neu-
ral network to put emphasis on vectors of a temporal
sequence that are more relevant for a given task. Originally,
attention was proposed by Bahdanau et al. (2016) to
improve sequence-to-sequence models such as RNNs for
machine translation. The general principle is to allocate a
different weight to the vectors of the input sequence when
using a combination of these vectors for estimating a vector
of the output sequence. The model is trained to compute the
optimal weights that reﬂect both the link between vectors of
the input sequence (self-attention) and the relevance of the
input vectors to explain each output vector (attention at the
decoder). This pioneering work has inspired the now popu-
lar Transformer architecture proposed by Vaswani et al.
(2017), which greatly improved the machine translation per-
formance. In the Transformer, RNNs are removed, i.e., they
are totally replaced by attention models.
FIG. 5. (Color online) The residual neural network architecture used by Yalta
et al. (2017). Three residual blocks are employed in this network, which are
each composed of two convolutional layers with 32 1 /C2 1 ﬁlters with another
convolutional layer with 32 3 /C2 3 ﬁlters in-between. For all three residual
blocks, the input is added to the output with a residual connection, showed
with a dashed arrow in this diagram. The authors show that the use of residual
connections not only reduces the learning cost, but also improves the model
performance. Note: Reprinted from Yalta et al. (2017); under Creative
Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
120 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Attention models are now used in an increasing number
of DL applications, including SSL. Phan et al. (2020a,b)
submitted an attention-based neural system for the DCASE
2020 Challenge. Their architecture was made of several
convolutional layers, followed by a BGRU, after which a
self-attention layer was used to infer the activity and the
DoA of several distinct sound events at each time step.
Schymura et al. (2020) added an attention mechanism after
the recurrent layers of a CRNN to output an estimation of
the sound source activity and its azimuth/elevation.
Compared to the baseline of Adavanne et al. (2019a), the
addition of attention demonstrated a better use of temporal
information for SELD. An extension of the system of
Chakrabarty and Habets (2019b) based on attention mecha-
nisms has been proposed by Mack et al. (2020). Attention is
employed to estimate binary masks to focus on frequency
bins where the target source is dominant. The ﬁrst attention
stage appears right after the input layer (analogously to
Chakrabarty and Habets, 2019b ), their network uses phase
spectrograms as inputs), while the second attention stage
takes place after new features have been extracted using
convolutional layers. Adavanne et al. (2021) used a self-
attention layer after a GRU in order to estimate the associa-
tion matrix which matches predictions and references. This
solves the optimal assignment problem and resulted in large
improvements in terms of localization error.
Multi-head self-attention (MHSA), which is the parallel
use of several Transformer-type attention models ( Vaswani
et al., 2017), has also inspired SSL methods. In the DCASE
2021 Challenge, Emmanuel et al. (2021) employed a
MHSA layer right after several convolution modules tai-
lored to learn varying spectral characteristics. Yalta et al.
(2021) proposed using the whole encoder part of the
Transformer architecture, in addition to several convolu-
tional layers, to extract features from the input data. Wang
et al. (2021) adapted the Conformer architecture, originally
designed by Gulati et al. (2020) for automatic speech
recognition, to SSL. This architecture is composed of a fea-
ture extraction module based on ResNet and a MHSA mod-
ule that learns local and global context representations. The
authors demonstrated the beneﬁt of using a speciﬁc data
augmentation technique on this model. Zhang et al. (2021)
also employed this architecture in the DCASE 2021
Challenge. As brieﬂy mentioned in the previous subsection,
Conformer blocks were also used in the architecture pro-
posed by Huang and Perez (2021) , where they followed a
sample-level CNN with residual connections and squeeze-
excitation. A Conformer block was also used in the archi-
tecture proposed for SELD by Rho et al. (2021), after
convolutional and fully-connected layers and before BGRU
layers. Cao et al. (2021) positioned an 8-head attention layer
after a series of convolutional layers to track the source
location predictions over time for different sources (up to
two sources in their experiments). Schymura et al. (2021)
used three 4-head self-attention encoders along the time axis
after a series of convolutional layers before estimating the
activity and location of several sound events (see Fig. 6).
This neural architecture showed an improvement over
the DCASE Challenge baseline of Adavanne et al. (2019a).
In the same line, Xinghao et al. (2021) replaced the con-
ventional convolutional layers of the baseline with a combi-
nation of adaptive convolutional layers (using dilated
convolutions with different dilation factors) and attention
blocks. Another example of MHSA-based Transformer
model for SSL can be found in the work of Park et al.
(2021a). In this work, a pretrained model is ﬁne-tuned with
transfer learning. The output sequence corresponding to
each 3 s-sequence of input data is averaged to provide one
DoA estimation. Sudarsanam et al. (2021) enriched the
CRNN baseline of Adavanne et al. (2019a) with a set of
several MHSA blocks followed by fully-connected layers.
They provided an analysis of the inﬂuence of the number
and dimension of the MHSA blocks (the optimal number
was found to be 2) and the number of heads (optimal was 8),
FIG. 6. (Color online) The self-attention-based neural network architecture of Schymura et al. (2021). The input is the multi-channel spectrogram shaped as
a K /C2 L /C2 2C tensor, with K the number of frequency bins, L the number of frames, and C the number of channels. A feature extraction is ﬁrst done with
convolutional layers (not detailed in the ﬁgure) to produce zk;n to which is attached a positional encoding vector pE. Then, a Transformer encoder computes
a new representation of shape K /C2 DE, which is used to compute the source activity ck;n and the mean ^xk;n of the multivariate Gaussian distributions repre-
senting the target sources’ location (the corresponding covariance matrix ^Rk;n is computed via a parallel (simpler) mechanism.) Note: Reprinted from
Schymura et al. (2021); copyright by the authors; reprinted with permission.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 121
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


as well as the effect of positional embedding, normalization
layers, and residual connections. Grumiaux et al. (2021b)
showed that replacing the recurrent layers of a CRNN with
self-attention encoders yielded a notable reduction in the
computation time. Moreover, the use of MHSA slightly
improved localization performance upon the baseline
CRNN architecture of Perotin et al. (2019b) for the consid-
ered multiple speaker localization task.
Finally, we can mention the use of cross-modal atten-
tion (CMA) models for SSL by Lee et al. (2021b). A CMA
model is the generalization of self-attention with two data
streams in place of one, which is used in the Transformer
decoder ( Vaswani et al., 2017 ). Lee et al. (2021b) used two
separate SED and DoA estimation CNN blocks to separately
produce SED and DoA embeddings (this comes in contrast
with most DCASE candidate systems where the ﬁrst blocks
are shared between SED and DoA estimation). Then these
embeddings are merged, ﬁrst with a weighted linear combi-
nation and then with a second, more complex, alignment
process using two mirrored CMA models. Finally, the SED
and DoA outputs of the CMA modules are each sent to three
parallel fully-connected networks for ﬁnal estimation (this is
because in the DCASE 2021 Challenge SELD Task, up to
three sources can be simultaneously active).
In a general manner, it appears that attention modules,
and MHSA in particular, have a tendency to replace the
recurrent units in the recent SSL DNNs, following the
“Attention is all you need” seminal line of Vaswani et al.
(2017). This is because compared to RNNs, attention mod-
ules can model longer-term dependencies at a lower compu-
tational cost and can highly beneﬁt from parallel
computations, especially at training time. This tendency is
also observed in other application domains, as we will dis-
cuss in Sec. IX.
G. Encoder-decoder neural networks
An encoder-decoder network is an architecture made of
two building blocks: an encoder, which is fed by the input
features and outputs a speciﬁc representation of the input
data, and a decoder, which transforms the new data repre-
sentation from the encoder into the desired output data.
Architectures following this principle have been largely
explored in the DL literature due to their capacity to provide
compact data representations in an unsupervised manner
(Goodfellow et al., 2016).
1. Autoencoder (AE)
An AE is an encoder-decoder neural network that is
trained to output a copy of its input. Often, the dimension of
the encoder’s last layer output is small compared to the
dimension of the data. This layer is then known as the bot-
tleneck layer and it provides a compressed encoding of the
input data. Originally, AEs were made of feed-forward
layers, but this term is also contemporaneously used to des-
ignate AE networks with other types of layers, such as con-
volutional or recurrent layers. To the best of our knowledge,
the ﬁrst use of an AE for DoA estimation was reported by
Zermini et al. (2016). They used a simple AE to estimate TF
masks for each possible DoA, which were then used for
source separation. An interesting AE-based method was pre-
sented by Huang et al. (2020), in which an ensemble of AEs
was trained to reproduce the multichannel input signal at the
output, with one AE per candidate source position. Since the
common latent information among the different channels is
the dry signal, each encoder approximately deconvolves the
signal from a given microphone. These dry signal estimates
should be similar provided that the source is indeed at the
assumed position; hence, the localization is performed by
ﬁnding the AE with the most consistent latent representation.
However, it is not clear whether this model can generalize
well to unseen source positions and acoustic conditions.
Le Moing et al. (2020) presented an AE with a large
number of convolutional layers (and transposed convolutional
layers, which are layers of the decoder that process the
inverse operation of the corresponding convolutional layer at
the encoder), which estimates the potential source activity of
each subregion in the ( x, y) plane divided in a grid, making it
possible to locate multiple sources. They evaluated several
types of outputs (binary, Gaussian-based, and binary followed
by regression reﬁnement), each of which showed promising
results on the simulated and real data. An extension of this
work was presented in Le Moing et al. (2021), in which they
proposed using adversarial training (see Sec. VIII)t oi m p r o v e
network performance on real data, as well as on microphone
arrays unseen in the training set, in an unsupervised training
scheme. To do this, they introduced a novel explicit transfor-
mation layer that helped the network to be invariant to the
microphone array layout. Another encoder-decoder architec-
ture was proposed by He et al. (2021b), in which a multichan-
nel waveform was fed into a ﬁlter bank with learnable
parameters, after which a 1D convolutional encoder-decoder
network processed the ﬁlter bank output. The output of the
last decoder was then fed separately into two branches, one
for SED and the other for DoA estimation.
An encoder-decoder structure with one encoder fol-
lowed by two separate decoders was proposed by Wu et al.
(2021b). Signals recorded from several microphone arrays
were ﬁrst transformed in the STFT domain (see Sec. V) and
then stacked in a 4D-tensor (whose dimensions were time,
frequency, microphone array, and microphone). This tensor
was then sent to the encoder block, which was made of a
series of convolutional layers followed by several residual
blocks. The output of the encoder was then fed into two sep-
arate decoders, the ﬁrst of which was trained to output a
probability of source presence for each candidate ( x, y)
region, while the second was trained in the same way but
with a range compensation to make the network more
robust. The same general encoder-decoder line was adopted
in the 2D image mapping approach proposed by Wu et al.
(2021a). Note that here, the network is composed of convo-
lutional layers at the encoder and transposed convolutional
layers at the decoder, which is typical for image mapping
applications in computer vision.
122 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Indirect use of an AE was proposed by Vera-Diaz et al.
(2020), who used convolutional and transposed convolu-
tional layers to estimate the TDoA from GCC-based input
features. The main idea was to rely on the encoder-decoder
capacity to reduce the dimension of the input data so that
the bottleneck representation forced the decoder to output a
smoother version of the TDoA. This technique was shown
to outperform the classical GCC-PHAT method in the
reported experiments. This work was extended in the pres-
ence of two sources ( Vera-Diaz et al., 2021).
2. Variational autoencoder (VAE)
A VAE is a generative model that was originally pro-
posed by Kingma and Welling (2014) and Rezende et al.
(2014) and is now very popular in the DL community. A
VAE can be seen as a probabilistic version of an AE. Unlike
a classical AE, a VAE learns a probability distribution of
the data at the output of the decoder and also models the
probability distribution of the so-called latent vector at the
bottleneck layer, which makes the VAE strongly connected
to the concept of unsupervised representation learning
(Bengio et al. , 2013 ). New data can thus be obtained with
the decoder by sampling these distributions.
To our knowledge, Bianco et al. (2020) were the ﬁrst to
apply a VAE for SSL. Their VAE, made of convolutional
layers, was trained to generate the phase of inter-
microphone RTFs (see Sec. VA1 ), jointly with a classiﬁer
that estimates the speaker’s DoA from the RTF phases. The
interest in using a VAE is that this generative model, origi-
nally designed for unsupervised training, is here trained in a
semi-supervised conﬁguration using a large dataset of unla-
beled RTF data together with a limited set of labeled data
(RTF values þ corresponding DoA labels). In such a limited
labeled dataset conﬁguration, this model was shown to out-
perform an SRP-PHAT-based method as well as a super-
vised CNN in reverberant scenarios. This semi-supervised
(or weakly supervised) approach is further discussed in Sec.
IX A. An extension of this work has been further proposed
in Bianco et al. (2021), with reﬁned network architectures
and more realistic acoustic scenarii.
3. U-Net architecture
A U-Net architecture is a particular fully-convolutional
neural network originally proposed by Ronneberger et al.
(2015) for biomedical image segmentation. In U-net, the
input features are decomposed into successive feature maps
throughout the encoder layers and then recomposed into
“symmetrical” feature maps throughout the decoder layers,
similarly to CNNs. Having the same dimension for feature
maps at the same level in the encoder and decoder enables
one to propagate information directly from an encoder level
to the corresponding level of the decoder via residual con-
nections. This leads to the typical U-shape schematization
(see Fig. 7).
Regarding SSL and DoA estimation, several works
have been inspired by the original U-Net paper. Chazan
et al. (2019) employed such an architecture to estimate one
TF mask per considered DoA (see Fig. 7), in which each TF
bin was associated with a single particular DoA. This spec-
tral mask was ﬁnally applied for source separation. This sys-
tem was extended by Hammer et al. (2021) to account for
multiple moving speakers. Another joint localization and
separation system based on a U-Net architecture was pro-
posed by Jenrungrot et al. (2020). In this system, a U-Net
was trained based on 1D convolutional layers and GLUs.
The input is the multichannel raw waveform accompanied
by an angular window that helps the network to perform
separation on a particular zone. If the output of the network
on the window is empty, no source is detected, otherwise,
one or more sources are detected and the process is repeated
with a smaller angular window until the angular window
reaches 2 /C14. This system shows interesting results on both
FIG. 7. (Color online) The U-Net network architecture of Chazan et al. (2019). The input matrix R contains angular features extracted from the RTFs (see
Sec. VA1 )( l, k, and M denote the time index, the frequency bin, and the number of microphones, respectively). Several stages of encoders (in blue) and
decoders (in green) are used. At each encoder (or decoder) stage, two or three convolutional layers with 3 /C2 3 kernels are employed to compute a new repre-
sentation which is used as the input of the next encoder (or decoder, respectively), except for the bottleneck stage from which the output is fed as inpu t into
the upper-stage decoder. Residual connections are used to concatenate one encoder output to the input of the same stage decoder, to alleviate the loss infor-
mation problem. The output of this system consists of one TF mask pl;k ðhÞ per considered DoA h. Note: Reprinted from Chazan et al. (2019); copyright by
IEEE; reprinted with permission.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 123
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


synthetic and real reverberant data containing up to eight
speakers.
For the DCASE 2020 Challenge, a U-Net with several
BGRU layers in-between the convolutional blocks was pro-
posed for SELD by Patel et al. (2020). The last transposed
convolutional layer of this U-Net outputs a single-channel
feature map per sound event, corresponding to its activity
and DoA for all frames. This showed an improvement over
the baseline of Adavanne et al. (2019a) in terms of DoA
error. Comanducci et al. (2020a) used a U-Net architecture
in the second part of their proposed neural network to esti-
mate the source coordinates x and y. The ﬁrst part, com-
posed of convolutional layers, learns to map GCC-PHAT
features to the so-called ray space (where source positions
correspond to linear patterns ( cf. Bianchi et al., 2016), which
is an intermediate representation used as the input of the U-
Net architecture.
V . INPUT FEATURES
In this section, we provide an overview of the variety of
input feature types found in the DL-based SSL literature.
Generally, the considered features can be low-level signal
representations such as waveforms or spectrograms, hand-
crafted features such as binaural features, or they can be bor-
rowed from traditional SP methods such as MUSIC or
GCC-PHAT.
Overwhelmingly, the input features for the SSL neural
networks are based on some representation readily used in
signal processing, often emphasizing spatial and/or TF infor-
mation embedded in the signal. This seems to yield good
results, despite the growing trend in other domains to learn
the feature representation directly from raw data. One inter-
pretation may be that the network architectures in SSL are
usually of a relatively modest size, as compared to end-to-
end models used in some other domains, e.g., NLP. A few
publications have compared different types of input features
for SSL (e.g., Krause et al., 2020b; Roden et al.,2 0 1 5).
It is also quite common to provide the network with
concatenated features of different nature (even if these carry
redundant information), which usually has positive impact on
performance. This can be attributed to the ﬂexibility of the
learning process, which seemingly adapts the network weights
such that the pertinent information is efﬁciently “routed” from
such an input to the upper layers of the network, where it is
merged into an abstract, optimized feature representation.
We organized this section into the following feature cat-
egories: inter-channel, CC-based, spectrogram-based,
Ambisonics, intensity-based, and ﬁnally the direct use of the
multichannel waveforms. Note that, as stated previously,
different kinds of features are often combined at the input
layer of SSL neural networks.
A. Inter-channel features
1. RTF
The RTF is a very general inter-channel feature that has
been widely used for conventional (non-deep) SSL and
other spatial audio processing such as source separation
and beamforming ( Gannot et al. ,2 0 1 7) and acoustic echo
cancellation ( Valero and Habets, 2017 ), and is now consid-
ered for DL-based SSL as well. The RTF is deﬁned for a
given sound source position and for a microphone pair as
the ratio Hðf Þ¼ A2ðf Þ=A1ðf Þ of the source-to-microphone
ATFs of the two microphones, A2ðf Þ and A1ðf Þ (here we
are working in the frequency or STFT domain and we
recall that an ATF is the discrete Fourier transform of the
corresponding RIR). It is thus strongly dependent on the
source DoA (for a given recording set-up). In a multichan-
nel set-up with more than two microphones, we can deﬁne
an RTF for each microphone pair. Often, one microphone
is used as a reference microphone, and the ATFs of all
other microphones are divided by the ATF of this reference
microphone.
As an ATF ratio, an RTF is thus a vector with an entry
deﬁned for each frequency bin. If only one directional source
is present in the recorded signals and if the (diffuse) back-
ground noise is negligible, Eq. (2) shows that an RTF esti-
mate can be obtained for each STFT frame (indexed by n),
each frequency bin, and each microphone pair (indexed by i
and k) by taking the ratio between the STFT transforms of
the recorded waveforms of the two considered channels,
Xiðf ; nÞ and Xkðf ; nÞ:
^Hi;kðf Þ¼ Xkðf ; nÞ
Xiðf ; nÞ /C25 Akðf ÞSðf ; nÞ
Aiðf ÞSðf ; nÞ ¼ Akðf Þ
Aiðf Þ ¼ Hi;kðf Þ; (10)
where S(f, n) is the STFT of the source signal. In the case
where a background/sensor noise is present, more sophisti-
cated RTF estimation procedures must be used (e.g., Cohen,
2004; Li et al., 2015 ; Markovich-Golan and Gannot, 2015 ).
If multiple sources are present, things become more compli-
cated, but using the natural sparsity of speech/audio signals
in the TF domain, i.e., only at most one source is assumed to
be active in each TF bin ( Rickard, 2002), the same principle
as for one active source can be applied separately in each
TF bin. Therefore, a multiple set of estimated RTFs at dif-
ferent frequencies (and possibly at different time frames if
the sources are static or not moving too fast) can be used for
multi-source localization. The reader is referred to ( Gannot
et al., 2017) and references therein for more information on
the RTF estimation problem.
An RTF is a complex-valued vector. In practice, an
equivalent real-valued pair of vectors is often used. We can
use either the real and imaginary parts or the modulus and
argument. Often, the log-squared value of the interchannel
power ratio is used, i.e., the interchannel power ratio in dB,
and the argument of the RTF estimate ideally corresponds to
the difference of the ATF phases. Such RTF-based represen-
tations have been used in several DNN-based systems for
SSL. For example, Chazan et al. (2019), Hammer et al.
(2021), Bianco et al. (2021), and Bianco et al. (2020) used
as input features the arguments of the measured RTFs
obtained from all microphone pairs.
124 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


2. Binaural features
Binaural features have also been used extensively for
SSL, in both conventional and deep systems ( Argentieri
et al. , 2015 ). These features correspond to a speciﬁc two-
channel recording set-up, one which attempts to reproduce
human hearing in the most realistic way possible. Toward
this aim, a dummy head/body with in-ear microphones is
used to mimic the source-to-human-ear propagation, and in
particular the effects of the head and external ear (pinnae),
which are important for source localization by the human
perception system. In an anechoic binaural set-up environ-
ment, the (two-channel) source-to-microphone impulse
response is referred to as the binaural impulse response
(BIR). The frequency-domain representation of a BIR is the
HRTF. Both BIR and HRTF are functions of the source
DoA. To take into account the room acoustics in a real-
world SSL application, BIRs are extended to binaural room
impulse responses (BRIRs), which combine head/body
effects and room effects (in particular reverberation, see fur-
ther discussion on BRIR simulation in Sec. VII A).
Several binaural features are derived from binaural
recordings: The interaural level difference corresponds to
the short-term log-power magnitude of the ratio between the
two binaural channels in the STFT domain, X2ðf ; nÞ and
X1ðf ; nÞ,
ILDðf ; nÞ¼ 20 log10
/C12/C12/C12/C12
X2ðf ; nÞ
X1ðf ; nÞ
/C12/C12/C12/C12 : (11)
The interaural phase difference is the argument of this ratio,
IPDðf ; nÞ¼ / X2ðf ; nÞ
X1ðf ; nÞ ; (12)
and the interaural time difference is the delay that maxi-
mizes the CC between the two channels, similarly to the
TDoA in Eq. (6). Just like the RTF, these features are actu-
ally vectors with frequency-dependent entries. In fact, the
ILD and IPD are strongly related (not to say similar) to the
log-power and argument of the RTF, as shown by compar-
ing Eqs. (11) and (12) with Eq. (10), the difference relying
more on the set-up than on the features themselves. The
RTF can be seen as a more general (multichannel) concept,
whereas binaural features refer to the speciﬁc two-channel
binaural setup. As for the RTF, the ILD, IPD, and ITD
implicitly encode the position of a source. Again, when sev-
eral sources are present, the sparsity of speech/audio signals
in the TF domain allows ILD/IPD/ITD values to provide
information on the position of several simultaneously active
sources.
Youssef et al. (2013) used ILD and ITD vectors fed sep-
arately into speciﬁc input branches of an MLP. Ma et al.
(2015) and Yiwere and Rhee (2017) concatenated the CC of
the two binaural channels with the ILD before feeding it
into the input layer of their network. Ma et al. (2015) justify
this choice with two arguments. The ﬁrst one is to avoid the
noise-sensitivity of the peak-picking operation for the
computation of the ITD, the second one is because of the
systematic changes in the CC function according to the
source azimuth. Nguyen et al. (2018) used the IPD as the
argument of a unitary complex number that was decom-
posed into real and imaginary parts. These parts were
concatenated to the ILD for several frequency bins and sev-
eral time frames, leading to a 2D tensor that was then fed
into a CNN. Pang et al. (2019) also used a CNN to process
ILD and IPD features in the TF domain, but the ILD and
IPD 2D-tensors were directly concatenated at the input of
the CNN. A system relying only on the IPD was proposed
by Pak and Shin (2019) . An MLP was trained to output a
clean version of the noisy input IPD in order to better
retrieve the DoA using a conventional method.
Sivasankaran et al. (2018) used as input features the concat-
enation of the cosine and sine of the IPDs for several fre-
quency bins and time frames. This choice was based on a
previous work that showed similar performance for this type
of input feature compared to classical phase maps, but with
a lower dimension. In an original way, Thuillier et al.
(2018) employed unusual binaural features. They used the
ipsilateral and contralateral spectra. These features were
shown to be relevant for elevation estimation using a CNN.
We ﬁnally found other DNN-based systems that used ILD
(e.g., Roden et al. , 2015 ; Zermini et al. , 2016 ), ITD (e.g.,
Roden et al. , 2015 ), or IPD (e.g., Shimada et al. , 2020a ;
Shimada et al., 2020b ; Subramanian et al., 2021b ; Zermini
et al., 2016) in addition to other types of features.
B. CC-based features
Another manner for extracting and exploiting inter-
channel information that depends on source location is to
use features based on the CC between the signals of differ-
ent channels. In particular, as seen in Sec. III, a variant of
CC known as GCC-PHAT is a common feature used in clas-
sical localization methods ( Knapp and Carter, 1976 ). It is
less sensitive to speech signal variations than standard CC,
but it may be adversely affected by noise and reverberation
(Blandin et al., 2012). Therefore, it has been used within the
framework of neural networks, which was revealed to be
robust to this type of disturbance/artefact. In several sys-
tems, GCC-PHAT has been computed for each microphone
pair and several time delays, all concatenated to form a 1D
vector used as the input of an MLP (e.g., He et al., 2018a ;
Vesperini et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2015). Other architectures
include convolutional layers to extract useful information
from multi-frame GCC-PHAT features, e.g., ( Comanducci
et al. , 2020a ; He et al. , 2018a ; Li et al. , 2018 ; Lu, 2019 ;
Maruri et al. , 2019 ; Noh et al. , 2019 ; Pratik et al. , 2019 ;
Song, 2020 ; Vecchiotti et al. , 2019b ; Vecchiotti et al. ,
2018).
Some SSL systems rely on the CPS, which we already
mentioned in Sec. III and which is linked to the CC by a
Fourier transform operation (in practice, short-term esti-
mates of the CPS are obtained by multiplying the STFT of
one channel with the conjugate STFT of the other channel).
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 125
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Leung and Ren (2019) and Xue et al. (2020) sent the CPS
into a CRNN architecture to improve localization perfor-
mance over the baseline of Adavanne et al. (2019a) (see
Sec. IV). Grondin et al. (2019) also used the cross-spectrum
for each microphone pair in the convolutional block of their
architecture, whereas GCC-PHAT features were
concatenated in a deeper layer. The CPS was also used by
Ma and Liu (2018) as an input feature. Acoustic imaging
has traditionally shown some interest in the CPS feature to
predict localization and sound pressure level of competing
sources; coupled with different architectures, from the sim-
ple MLP ( Castellini et al. , 2021 ) to the complex CNN
DenseNet network ( Xu et al. , 2021a ), authors have shown
that the use of DNN could outperform traditional deconvo-
lution methods, either in performance or computation time.
Traditional localization methods, such as MUSIC
(Schmidt, 1986 ) or ESPRIT ( Roy and Kailath, 1989 ), have
been widely examined in the literature (see Sec. III). These
methods are based on the eigen-decomposition of the CC
matrix of a multichannel recording. Several DNN-based
SSL systems ( Takeda and Komatani, 2016a ,b, 2017; Takeda
et al., 2018) have been inspired by these methods and reuse
such features as input for their neural networks. Nguyen
et al. (2020a) computed the spatial pseudo-spectrum based
on the MUSIC algorithm and then used it as input features
for a CNN.
Power map methods, which were discussed in Sec. III,
have also been used to derive input features for DNN-based
SSL systems. Salvati et al. (2018) proposed calculating the
narrowband normalized steered response power for a set of
candidate TDoAs corresponding to an angular grid and feed-
ing it into a convolutional layer. This led to a localization
performance improvement compared to the traditional SRP-
PHAT method. Such power maps were also used by Diaz-
Guerra et al. (2021b) as inputs of 3D convolutional layers.
In acoustic imaging, a SRP map is also a standard feature
where ﬁnding the position and the acoustic level is the main
goal. Some recent works used a CNN ( Gonc¸alves Pinto
et al., 2021) or a U-Net ( Lee et al., 2021b) to produce clean
deconvolved maps, hence going beyond the intrinsic resolu-
tion of the array.
C. Spectrogram-based features
Alternatively to inter-channel features or CC-based fea-
tures which already encode relative information between
channels, another approach is to provide an SSL system
directly with “raw” multichannel information, i.e., without
any pre-processing in the channel dimension.
This does not prevent some pre-processing in the other
dimensions and, from a historical perspective, we notice that
many models in this line use spectral or spectro-temporal
features instead of raw waveforms (see next subsection) as
inputs. In practice, (multichannel) STFT spectrograms are
typically used ( Vincent et al. , 2018 ). These multichannel
spectrograms are generally organized as 3D tensors, with
one dimension for time (or frames), one for frequency
(bins), and one for channel. The general spirit of DNN-based
SSL methods is that the network should be able to “see” by
itself and automatically extract and exploit the differences
between TF spectrograms along the channel dimension while
exploiting the sparsity of TF signal representation.
In several works, the individual spectral vectors from
the different STFT frames were provided independently to
the neural model, meaning that the network did not take into
account their temporal correlation (and a localization result
is generally obtained independently for each frame). Thus,
in that case, the network input is a matrix of size M /C2 K,
with M being the number of microphones, and K being the
number of considered STFT frequency bins. Hirvonen
(2015) concatenated the log-spectra of eight channels for
each individual analysis frame and sent it into a CNN as a
2D matrix. Chakrabarty and Habets (2017a ,b, 2019a,b) and
Mack et al. (2020) used the multichannel phase spectrogram
as input features, disregarding the magnitude information.
This choice is motivated by the fact that it allows to easily
generate a training dataset from white noise signals. As an
extension of this work, phase maps were also exploited by
Bohlender et al. (2021).
When several consecutive frames are considered, the
STFT coefﬁcients for multiple timesteps and multiple fre-
quency bins form a 2D matrix for each recording channel.
Usually, these spectrograms are stacked together in a third
dimension to form the 3D input tensor. Several systems con-
sidered only the magnitude spectrograms (e.g., Patel et al. ,
2020; Pertil€a and Cakir, 2017 ; Wang et al. , 2019 ; Yalta
et al., 2017), while others considered only the phase spectro-
gram (e.g., Subramanian et al., 2021b; Zhang et al., 2019b).
When considering both magnitude and phase, they can also
be stacked in a third dimension (as well as channels). This
representation has been employed in many DNN-based SSL
systems (e.g., Guirguis et al., 2020; He et al., 2021a; Kapka
and Lewandowski, 2019 ; Krause and Kowalczyk, 2019 ;
Krause et al. , 2020a ; Lin and Wang, 2019 ; Maruri et al. ,
2019; Schymura et al. , 2021 ; Zhang et al. , 2019a ). Yang
et al. (2021a) dedicated different input branches of their
CRNN to magnitude and phase features. Other authors have
proposed to decompose the complex-valued spectrograms
into real and imaginary parts (e.g., Hao et al. , 2020 ; He
et al. , 2018b ; K€uc¸ €uk et al. , 2019 ; Le Moing et al. , 2020 ).
Finally, Leung and Ren (2019) tried several combinations of
features computed from the complex multi-channel spectro-
gram, including the magnitude and phase, the real and imag-
inary parts, and the CPS. They claim that providing this
redundant information could help the neural network for
better localization.
While basic (STFT) spectrograms consider equally-
spaced frequency bins, mel-scale spectrograms and Bark-
scale spectrograms are represented with a non-linear
sub-bands division, corresponding to a perceptual scale (low-
frequency sub-bands have a higher resolution than high-
frequency sub-bands) ( Peeters, 2004 ). Mel-spectrograms
were preferred to STFT spectrograms in several SSL
neural networks (e.g., Cao et al., 2019a ; Cao et al., 2019b ;
126 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Kong et al. ,2 0 1 9; Ranjan et al. , 2019 ; Vecchiotti et al. ,
2018). The Bark scale was also explored for spectrograms in
the SSL system of Pratik et al. (2019).
D. Ambisonic signal representation
In the SSL literature, numerous systems utilize the
Ambisonics format, i.e., the SH decomposition coefﬁcients
(Jarrett et al. , 2017 ), to represent the input signal.
Ambisonics is a multichannel format that is increasingly
used due to its capability to represent the spatial properties
of a sound ﬁeld, while being agnostic to the microphone
array conﬁguration ( Zotter and Frank, 2019 ).
The SH decomposition is done for the acoustic pressure
measured on the surface of a sphere S2, concentric with the
microphone array. For a ﬁxed sound source in far ﬁeld, the
decomposition coefﬁcient of order ‘ and degree m 2½ /C0 ‘; ‘/C138,
in the STFT domain, is given as follows ( Jarrett et al. ,
2017):
B‘;mðf ; nÞ¼
ð
X2S2
Xðf ; n; XÞY/C3
‘;mðXÞdX; (13)
where Xðf ; n; XÞ and Y‘;mðXÞ are the acoustic pressure and
the SH function, at the direction X, respectively. In practice,
this integral is approximated by a quadrature rule, since the
number of microphones consisting of an array is ﬁnite. Such
approximation implies that the pressure Xðf ; n; XÞ is
assumed to be an (almost) “order-limited” function on the
sphere ( Rafaely, 2019 ), meaning that B‘>L;mðf ; nÞ¼ 0, for
some maximal order L (that depends on the number of
microphones in the array). Hence, for FOA ( L ¼ 1), the
Ambisonics representation (13) counts only 4 coefﬁcients
(channels) per TF bin. Alternatively, the Higher-Order
Ambisonics (HOA), L > 1, signals have more than four
channels.
The plane wave, bearing an amplitude S(f, n), and com-
ing from a direction X, admits a simple SH representation
B‘;mðf ; nÞ¼ Sðf ; nÞY‘;mðXÞ (Rafaely, 2019 ). Therefore, as
opposed to other types of microphone arrays, the Ambisonic
channels are in phase, since the spatial response of each
channel Y‘;mðXÞ is TF-independent. 2 Analogous to Eq. (3),
the multichannel Ambisonic spectrogram Bðf ; nÞ, due to J
sources and reverberation, is given by the multivariate
expression
Bðf ;nÞ¼
XJ
j¼1
X1
r¼0
Ajr ðf ;nÞSjðf ;nÞYðXjr Þþ Nðf ;nÞ; (14)
where Ajr is the amplitude of the rth reﬂection of the source
Sj (with r ¼ 0 corresponding to the direct path), Y is the vec-
tor whose entries are appropriate spherical harmonics Y‘;m
for all considered Ambisonic orders, and N is the additive
noise vector. Note that the complex-valued amplitudes Ajr
account for the attenuation and phase shift of a correspond-
ing plane wave component.
The FOA spectrograms, decomposed into magnitude
and phase components, have been used by Adavanne et al.
(2019a), Adavanne et al. (2018, 2019b); Guirguis et al.
(2020), Kapka and Lewandowski (2019) , and Krause and
Kowalczyk (2019) . Varanasi et al. (2020) and Poschadel
et al. (2021a,b) used third-order Ambisonics spectrograms.
Poschadel et al. (2021a) and Poschadel et al. (2021b) com-
pared the performance of a CRNN with HOA spectrograms
from order 1 to 4, showing that the higher the order, the bet-
ter the localization accuracy of the network (but still below
the performance of the so-called FOA pseudo-intensity fea-
tures, which we will discuss in Sec. VE ). They used the
phase and magnitude for both elevation and azimuth estima-
tion. Another way of representing the Ambisonics format
was proposed by Comminiello et al. (2019). Based on the
FOA spectrograms, they proposed considering them as
quaternion-based input features, which proved to be a suit-
able representation in previous works ( Parcollet et al. ,
2018). To cope with this type of input feature, a neural net-
work was adapted from the one of Adavanne et al. (2019a),
showing an improvement over the baseline.
E. Intensity-based features
Sound intensity is an acoustic quantity deﬁned as the
product of sound pressure and particle velocity ( Jacobsen
and Juhl, 2013 ; Rossing, 2007 ). In the frequency or TF
domain, sound intensity is a complex vector whose real part
(known as “active” intensity) is proportional to the gradient
of the phase of sound pressure, i.e., it is orthogonal to the
wavefront. This is a useful property that has been exten-
sively used for SSL (e.g., Evers et al., 2014; Hickling et al.,
1993; Jarrett et al. , 2010 ; Kitic´ and Gu /C19erin, 2018 ; Nehorai
and Paldi, 1994 ; Pavlidi et al. , 2015 ; Tervo, 2009 ). The
imaginary part (“reactive” intensity) is related to oscillatory
local energy transfers, and its physical interpretation is less
obvious ( Maysenh€older, 1993 ). Hence, it has been largely
ignored by the SSL community, even though it is relevant in
room acoustics ( Nolan et al. , 2019 ). While the pressure is
directly measurable by regular microphones, particle veloc-
ity requires speciﬁc sensors, such as acoustic vector-sensors
(Jacobsen and Juhl, 2013 ; Nehorai and Paldi, 1994 ), e.g., the
“Microﬂown” transducer ( de Bree, 2003 ). Otherwise, it has
to be approximated using the acoustic pressure measure-
ments. Under certain conditions, particle velocity can be
assumed to be proportional to the spatial gradient of sound
pressure ( Merimaa, 2006 ; Rossing, 2007 ), which allows for
the estimation by, e.g., the ﬁnite difference method ( Tervo,
2009) or using the FOA channels discussed in the previous
section ( Zotter and Frank, 2019 ). The latter approximation
is often called (FOA) complex pseudo-intensity vector
(Jarrett et al., 2010),
Iðf ; nÞ¼ B0;0ðf ; nÞB‘¼1;mðf ; nÞ/C3 ; (15)
where B/C3
‘¼1;mðf ; nÞ is the vector of ﬁrst-order SH coefﬁ-
cients, excluding the zero-order B0;0ðf ; nÞ. In free ﬁeld con-
ditions, assuming the presence of a single source at the TF
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 127
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


bin (f, n), the entries of <ðIðf ; nÞÞ are the Cartesian coordi-
nates of a vector colinear with the DoA of the source (with
< denoting the real part of a complex value).
The ﬁrst use of an Ambisonics pseudo-intensity vector
for DL-based SSL was reported by Perotin et al. (2018b),
showing superiority in performance compared to the use of
the raw Ambisonics waveforms and traditional Ambisonics-
based methods. Interestingly, the authors demonstrated that
using both active and reactive intensity improves SSL per-
formance. Moreover, they normalized the intensity vector of
each frequency band by its energy, which can be shown to
yield features similar to RTFs in the spherical harmonics
domain ( Daniel and Kitic ´, 2020 ; Jarrett et al. , 2017 ).
Yasuda et al. (2020) proposed using two CRNNs to reﬁne
the input FOA pseudo-intensity vector. The ﬁrst CRNN is
trained to estimate denoising and separation masks under
the assumption that there are two active sources and that the
WDO hypothesis holds. The second CRNN estimates
another mask to remove the remaining unwanted compo-
nents (e.g., reverberation). The two networks, hence, pro-
duce an estimate of the “clean” intensity vector for each
active source (the NoS is estimated by their system as well).
The pseudo-intensity vector has consequently been used in
several other recent works, e.g., ( Cao et al. , 2021 ; Cao
et al. , 2019a ; Grumiaux et al. , 2021a ; Grumiaux et al. ,
2021b; Nguyen et al. , 2021a ; Park et al. , 2020 ; Perotin
et al., 2019a ; Perotin et al., 2019b ; Song, 2020 ; Tang et al.,
2019).
Sound intensity was also explored by Liu et al. (2021)
without the Ambisonics representation. The authors com-
puted the instantaneous complex sound intensity using an
average of the sound pressure across the four considered
channels and two orthogonal particle velocity components
using the differences in sound pressure for both microphone
pairs. They kept only the real part of the estimated sound
intensity (active intensity) and applied a PHAT weighting to
improve the robustness against reverberation.
F. Waveforms
Since 2018, several authors have proposed directly pro-
viding their neural network models with the raw multichan-
nel recorded signal waveforms. This idea relies on the
DNN’s capability to ﬁnd the best representation for SSL
without the need of hand-crafted features or pre-processing
of any kind. This is in line with the general trend of DL to
go toward an end-to-end approach that is observed in many
other applications, including in speech/audio processing. Of
course, this goes together with the always increasing size of
networks, datasets, and computational power.
To our knowledge, Suvorov et al. (2018) were the ﬁrst
to apply this idea. They trained their neural network directly
with the recorded eight-channel waveforms, stacking many
1D convolutional layers to extract high-level features for the
ﬁnal DoA classiﬁcation. Vera-Diaz et al. (2018), Vecchiotti
et al. (2019a), Chytas and Potamianos (2019) , Cao et al.
(2020), and Pujol et al. (2019, 2021) sent the raw
multichannel waveforms into 2D convolutional layers.
Huang and Perez (2021) sent the raw multichannel wave-
forms (in microphone format and FOA format) into a 1D
CNN with residual connections and squeeze-excitation
blocks. Note that this model is used for SELD and the
authors motivate the use of raw waveform inputs by the fact
that “SED and DOA may have some common features that
are better preserved in the raw audio [wave]form.” Huang
et al. (2020) sent the multichannel waveforms into an AE.
Jenrungrot et al. (2020) shifted the waveforms of each chan-
nel to make them temporally aligned according to the TDoA
before being injected into the input layer of their network.
In the same vein, Huang et al. (2018, 2019) proposed time-
shifting the multichannel signal by calculating the time
delay between the microphone position and the candidate
source location, which requires scanning for all candidate
locations.
A potential disadvantage of waveform-based features is
that the architectures exploiting such data are often more
complex, as one part of the network needs to be dedicated to
feature extraction. Moreover, some papers have reported
that learning the “optimal” feature representations from raw
data becomes more difﬁcult when noise is present in the
input signals ( Wichern et al., 2019 ) or may even harm gen-
eralization, in some cases ( Sato et al., 2021 ). However, it is
interesting to mention that the visual inspection of the
learned weights of the input layers of some end-to-end
(waveform-based) neural networks has revealed that they
resemble the ﬁlterbanks that are usually applied in the pre-
processing stage of SSL (see Sec. VC ) and other various
classical speech/audio processing tasks ( Luo and Mesgarani,
2019; Sainath et al., 2017).
G. Other types of features
Varzandeh et al. (2020) have proposed unusual types of
features that do not belong to one of the categories described
previously. Particularly, they have used a periodicity degree
feature together with GCC-PHAT features in a CNN. The
periodicity degree is computed for a given frame and period.
It is equal to the ratio between the harmonic power signal
for the given period and the total power signal. This conveys
information about the harmonic content of the source signal
to the CNN.
VI. OUTPUT STRATEGIES
In this section, we discuss the different strategies pro-
posed in the literature to obtain a ﬁnal DoA estimate. We
generally divide the strategies into two categories: classiﬁ-
cation and regression. When the SSL network is designed
for the classiﬁcation task, the source location search space is
generally divided into several zones, corresponding to dif-
ferent classes, and the neural network outputs a probability
value for each class. As for regression, the goal is to directly
estimate (continuous) source position/direction values,
which are usually either Cartesian coordinates ( x, y, z), or
spherical coordinates ðh; /; rÞ (although the source-
128 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


microphone distance r is very rarely considered). However,
the latter is an important factor as it can affect the estimation
accuracy (for instance, due to the inﬂuence of the direct-to-
reverberant ratio, DRR; Vincent et al., 2018 ). Therefore, in
order to obtain a robust model, the training dataset needs to
be sufﬁciently diverse such that the network is exposed to
sources at different directions, but also at different source-
microphone distances. In the last subsection, we report a
few non-direct methods in which the neural network does
not estimate the location of a source in its output layer.
Instead, it either helps another (conventional) algorithm to
ﬁnally retrieve the desired DoA, or the location estimate is a
by-product of some intermediate network layer. A reader
particularly interested in the comparison between the classi-
ﬁcation and regression approaches may consult the papers
of Tang et al. (2019) and Perotin et al. (2019a).
A. DoA estimation via classification
Many systems treat DoA estimation as a classiﬁcation
problem, i.e., each class represents a certain zone in the con-
sidered search space. In other words, space is divided into
several subregions, usually of similar size, and the neural
network is trained to produce a probability of active source
presence for each subregion. Such a classiﬁcation problem
is often addressed by using a feedforward layer as the last
layer in the network, with as many neurons as the number of
considered subregions. Two activation functions are gener-
ally associated with the ﬁnal layer neurons: the softmax and
sigmoid functions. Softmax ensures that the sum of all neu-
ron outputs is 1, so it is suitable for a single-source localiza-
tion scenario. With a sigmoid, all neuron outputs are within
½0; 1/C138independently from each other, which is suitable for
multi-source localization. The last layer output is often
referred to as the spatial (pseudo)-spectrum , whose peaks
correspond to a high probability of source activity in the
corresponding zone.
As already mentioned in Sec. II C, the ﬁnal DoA esti-
mate(s) is/are generally extracted using a peak picking algo-
rithm: If the number of sources J is known, the selection of
the J highest peaks gives the multi-source DoA estimation;
if the NoS is unknown, usually the peaks above a certain
user-deﬁned threshold are selected, leading to a joint NoS
and localization estimations. Some preprocessing, such as
spatial spectrum smoothing or angular distance constraints,
can be used for better DoA estimation. Hence, such a classi-
ﬁcation strategy can be readily used for single-source and/or
multi-source localization, as the neural network is trained to
estimate a probability of source activity in each zone,
regardless of the NoS.
1. Spherical coordinates
Regarding the quantization of the source location space,
namely, the localization grid, different approaches have
been proposed. Most early works focused on estimating
only the source’s azimuth h relative to the microphone array
position, dividing the 360 /C14azimuth space into Nh regions of
equal size, leading to a grid quantization step of 360 =Nh.
Without being exhaustive, we found in the literature many
different values for Nh, e.g., Nh ¼ 7( Roden et al. , 2015 ),
Nh ¼ 8( Hirvonen, 2015 ), Nh ¼ 20 ( Suvorov et al. , 2018 ),
Nh ¼ 37 ( Vecchiotti et al. , 2019a ), Nh ¼ 72 ( Ma et al. ,
2015), and Nh ¼ 360 ( Xiao et al., 2015 ). Some other works
did not consider the whole 360 /C14azimuth space. For exam-
ple, Chazan et al. (2019) focused on the region ½0; 180/C138with
Nh ¼ 13.
Estimating the elevation / alone has not been fre-
quently investigated in the literature, probably because of
the lack of interesting applications in indoor scenarios. To
the best of our knowledge, only one paper focused on esti-
mating the elevation alone ( Thuillier et al. , 2018 ). The
authors divided the whole elevation range into nine regions
of equal size. The majority of recent SSL neural networks
are trained to estimate both source azimuth and elevation,
whenever the microphone array geometry makes it possible.
To do this, several options have been proposed in the litera-
ture. One can use two separate output layers, each with the
same number of neurons as the number of subregions in the
corresponding dimension. For example, the output layer of
the neural architecture proposed by Fahim et al. (2020) is
divided into two branches with fully connected layers, one
for azimuth estimation ( Nh neurons), and the other for eleva-
tion estimation ( N/ neurons). One can also have a single
output layer where each neuron corresponds to a zone in the
unit sphere, i.e., a unique pair ðh; /Þ (e.g., Grumiaux et al.,
2021b; Perotin et al. , 2019b ). Finally, one can directly
design two separate neural networks, with each estimating
the azimuth or the elevation angle, e.g., ( Varanasi et al. ,
2020).
However, most of the neural networks following the
classiﬁcation strategy for joint azimuth and elevation esti-
mation are designed so that the output corresponds to a 2D
grid on the unit sphere. For example, Perotin et al. (2018b,
2019b) and Grumiaux et al. (2021a) used a quasi-uniform
spherical grid with 429 classes, each represented by a
unique neuron in the output layer of their network.
Adavanne et al. (2018) sampled the unit sphere in the whole
azimuth axis but in the limited elevation range of
½/C0 60/C14; 60/C14/C138, yielding an output vector corresponding to 432
classes.
Distance estimation has barely been investigated in the
SSL literature, highlighting the fact that it is a difﬁcult prob-
lem. Roden et al. (2015) addressed the distance estimation
along with azimuth or elevation prediction by dividing the
distance range into ﬁve candidate classes. Yiwere and Rhee
(2017) quantized the distance range into four classes and
estimated it along with three possible azimuth values. In the
paper by Takeda and Komatani (2016b) , the azimuth axis
was classiﬁed with I ¼ 72 classes along with the distance
and height of the source, but these last two quantities were
classiﬁed into a very small set of possible pairs: (30, 30),
(90, 30) and (90, 90) (in centimeters). Bologni et al. (2021)
trained a CNN to classify a single-source signal into a 2D
map representing the azimuth and distance dimensions.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 129
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


2. Cartesian coordinates
A few works applied the classiﬁcation paradigm to esti-
mate the Cartesian coordinates. Le Moing et al. (2021), Le
Moing et al. (2020), and Ma and Liu (2018) divided the hor-
izontal (x, y) plane into small regions of the same size, with
each being a class in the output layer. However, this repre-
sentation suffers from a decreasing angular difference
between the regions that are far from the microphone array,
which is probably why regression is usually preferred for
estimating Cartesian coordinates.
B. DoA estimation via regression
In regression SSL networks, the source location esti-
mate is directly given by the continuous value provided by
one or several output neurons (whether we consider
Cartesian or spherical coordinates, and how many source
coordinates are of interest). This technique offers the advan-
tage of a potentially more accurate DoA estimation since
there is no quantization. Its drawback is twofold. First, the
NoS needs to be known or assumed, as there is no way to
estimate if a source is active or not based on a localization
regression. Second, regression-based SSL usually faces the
well-known source permutation problem ( Subramanian
et al., 2021b ), which occurs in the multi-source localization
conﬁguration and is common with DL-based source separa-
tion methods. Indeed, during the computation of the loss
function at the training time, there is an ambiguity in the
association between target and actual output—in other
words, which estimate should be associated with which tar-
get? This issue also arises during the evaluation. One possi-
ble solution is to force the SSL network training to be
permutation invariant ( Subramanian et al. , 2021b ), in line
with what was proposed for audio source separation ( Yu
et al., 2017).
As for classiﬁcation, when using regression, there is a
variety of possibilities for the type of coordinates to be esti-
mated. The choice among these possibilities is driven more
by the context or the application than by design limitations
since regression generally requires only a few output
neurons.
1. Spherical coordinates
Tsuzuki et al. (2013) proposed a complex-valued neural
approach for SSL. The output of the network is a complex
number of unit amplitude whose argument is an estimate of
the azimuth of the source. A direct regression scheme was
employed by Nguyen et al. (2018) with a two-neuron output
layer that predicts the azimuth and elevation values in a
single-source environment. The system of Opochinsky et al.
(2019) performed only azimuth estimation. Regarding the
DCASE 2019 Challenge ( Politis et al. , 2020b ), a certain
number of candidate systems have used two neurons per
event type to estimate the azimuth and elevation of the con-
sidered event (e.g., Cao et al. , 2019a ; Chytas and
Potamianos, 2019; Park et al., 2019b), while the event activ-
ity was jointly estimated in order to extract (or not) the
corresponding coordinates. Sudo et al. (2019) proposed rep-
resenting the output as a quaternion including the cosinus
and sinus of the azimuth and elevation angles, from which
they retrieve the DoA angle values. This enables to tackle
the problem of discontinuity at angle interval boundaries
(for instance, at /C0 180/C14and 180/C14).
In the system of Maruri et al. (2019), azimuth and ele-
vation estimations were done separately in two network
branches, each containing a speciﬁc dense layer. Sundar
et al. (2020) proposed a regression method relying on a pre-
ceding classiﬁcation step: dividing the azimuth space into I
equal subregions, with the output of the neural network
being made of 3 I neurons. Assuming there is at most one
active source per subregion, three neurons are associated
with each of them: one neuron is trained to detect the pres-
ence of a source, while the other two neurons estimate the
distance and azimuth of that source. The loss function for
training is a weighted sum of categorical cross-entropy (for
the classiﬁcation task) and mean square error (for the regres-
sion task).
2. Cartesian coordinates
Another way to predict the DoA with regression is to
estimate the Cartesian coordinates of the source(s).
Vesperini et al. (2016) designed their network output layer
with only two neurons to estimate the coordinates x and y in
the horizontal plane, with an output range normalized within
½0; 1/C138, which represents the scaled version of the room size
in each dimension. Following the same idea, Vecchiotti
et al. (2019b) and Vecchiotti et al. (2018) also used two
neurons to estimate ( x, y) but added a third one to estimate
the source activity.
The estimation of the three Cartesian coordinates ( x, y,
z) has been investigated in several systems. Vera-Diaz et al.
(2018) and Krause et al. (2020a) designed the output layer
with three neurons to estimate the coordinates of a single
source with regression. Adavanne et al. (2019a) and
Adavanne et al. (2019b) chose the same strategy. However,
they performed SELD for several types of event, and thus
there are three output neurons to provide ( x, y, z) estimates
for each event type, plus another output neuron to estimate
whether or not this event is active. The hyperbolic tangent
activation function is used for the localization neurons to
keep the output values in the ½/C0 1; 1/C138range, leading to a
DoA estimate on the unit sphere. The same strategy was fol-
lowed in an extension of this work by Comminiello et al.
(2019).
In Shimada et al. (2020a), the authors proposed the
activity-coupled cartesian direction of arrival (ACCDOA)
representation which encodes the DoA with the source
activity in a single vector, separately for each sound class to
be localized. More speciﬁcally, the ACCDOA vector enco-
des the Cartesian coordinates ( x, y, z), is then normalized
and then multiplied by the source activity ( 2½ 0; 1/C138). Using a
threshold, the active sources can be detected using this vec-
tor norm, and their respective DoAs can be retrieved from
130 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


the normalized Cartesian coordinates. This ACCDOA out-
put representation has then been used in other works (e.g.,
Emmanuel et al. , 2021 ; Naranjo-Alcazar et al. , 2021 ;
Nguyen et al., 2021b ; Shimada et al., 2021 ; Shimada et al.,
2020b; Sudarsanam et al., 2021).
C. Non-direct DoA estimation
Neural networks have also been used in the regression
mode to estimate intermediate quantities, which are then
used by a non-neural algorithm to predict the ﬁnal DoA.
Pertil€a and Cakir (2017) proposed using a CNN in the
regression mode to estimate a TF mask. This mask was then
applied to the noisy multichannel spectrogram to obtain an
estimate of the clean multichannel spectrogram, and a clas-
sical SRP-PHAT method was next applied to retrieve the
ﬁnal DoA. Another TF mask estimation was done by Wang
et al. (2019) using a bidirectional LSTM network to
improve traditional DoA estimation methods, such as GCC-
PHAT or MUSIC. Pak and Shin (2019) trained an MLP to
remove unwanted artefacts of the IPD input features. The
cleaned feature was then used to estimate the DoA with a
non-neural method. Yasuda et al. (2020) proposed a method
to ﬁlter out reverberation and other non-desired effects from
the intensity vector by TF mask estimation. The ﬁltered
intensity vector led to a better DoA estimation than an
intensity-based conventional method. Yang et al. (2021a)
used a two-stage neural network system to estimate the
direct-path RTF (DP-RTF), that is, the part of the RTF that
corresponds to the direct source-to-microphone propagation
(Li et al., 2016b). In Yang et al. (2021a), the source DoA is
the direction parameter of a DP-RTF taken from a dictionary
of pre-computed DP-RTFs, corresponding to the closest
match with the network estimate.
Huang et al. (2018, 2019) employed neural networks on
multichannel waveforms, shifted in time with a delay corre-
sponding to a certain candidate source location, to estimate
the original dry signal. Doing this for a set of candidate loca-
tions, they then calculated the sum of CC coefﬁcients
between the estimated dry source signals for all candidate
source locations. The ﬁnal estimated location was obtained
as the one leading to the maximum sum.
A joint localization and separation scheme was pro-
posed by Jenrungrot et al. (2020). The neural network was
trained to estimate the signal coming from a certain direc-
tion within a certain angular window, whose parameters
were injected as an input to each layer. Thus, the network
acted like a radar and scanned through all directions, then
progressively reduced the angular window up to a desired
angular resolution.
Several works proposed employing neural networks for
a better prediction of the TDoA, which is then used to deter-
mine the DoA as often done in traditional methods. Grondin
et al. (2019) estimated the TDoA in the regression mode
using a hyperbolic tangent activation function at the output
layer. Vera-Diaz et al. (2020) used an AE to estimate a func-
tion from GCC-based features (similar to TDoA) that
exhibited a clear peak corresponding to the estimated DoA.
Their work was extended in the presence of two sources
(Vera-Diaz et al., 2021 ). In Comanducci et al. (2020b), the
authors employed a U-Net in a regression manner to clean
GCC-based features from noise and reverberation.
Subramanian et al. (2021a) proposed a neural system
based on a stacked localization network, parametric beam-
formers and a speech recognition network. Since each of
these modules is differentiable, the system is trained in the
end-to-end mode, using an ASR-speciﬁc cost function.
Despite being optimized for the ASR, the trained system
also exhibits very good performance in terms of source sep-
aration and localization, whose predictions are the interme-
diate results, retrievable at the output of the corresponding
processing modules.
VII. DATA
In this section, we detail the different approaches taken
to deal with data during model training or testing. Because
we are dealing with indoor domestic/ofﬁce environments,
noise and reverberation are common in real-world signals.
We successively inspect the use of synthetic and recorded
datasets in DNN-based SSL.
A. Synthetic data
A well-known limitation of supervised learning (see
Sec. VIII) for SSL is the lack of labeled training data. In a
general manner, it is difﬁcult to produce datasets of recorded
signals with corresponding source position metadata in
diverse spatial conﬁgurations (and possibly with diverse
spectral content) that would be sufﬁciently large for efﬁcient
SSL neural model training. Therefore, one often has to simu-
late a large amount of data to obtain an efﬁcient SSL
system.
To generate realistic data, taking into account reverber-
ation, one needs to simulate the room acoustics. This is usu-
ally done by synthesizing the RIR that models the sound
propagation for a “virtual” source-microphone pair. This is
done for all microphones of the array (and for a large num-
ber of source positions and microphone array positions, see
next). Then, a “dry” (i.e., clean reverberation-free monopho-
nic) source signal is convolved with this RIR to obtain the
simulated microphone signal (this is done for every channel
of the microphone array). As already stated in Sec. IB , the
foundation of SSL relies on the fact that the relative location
of a source with respect to the microphone array position is
implicitly encoded in the (multichannel) RIR, and an SSL
DNN learns to extract and exploit this information from
examples. Therefore, such data generation has to be done
with many different dry signals and for a large number of
simulated RIRs with different source and microphone array
positions. The latter must be representative of the conﬁgura-
tions in which the SSL system will be used in practice.
Moreover, other parameters, such as room dimensions and
reverberation time, may have to be varied to take into
account other factors of variations in SSL.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 131
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


One advantage of this approach is that many dry signal
datasets exist, in particular for speech signals (e.g., Garofolo
et al. , 1993a ; Garofolo et al. , 1993b ; Lamel et al. , 1991 ).
Therefore, many SSL methods are trained with dry speech
signals convolved with simulated RIRs. Chakrabarty and
Habets (2017a ,b) used white noise as the dry signal for
training and speech signals for testing. This approach is
reminiscent of the work of Deleforge et al. (2013) and
Deleforge et al. (2015) based on a GMR and already men-
tioned in Sec. III. Using white noise as the dry signal ena-
bles the acquisition of training data that are “dense” in the
TF domain. However, Vargas et al. (2021) showed that
training on speech or music signals leads to better results
than noise-based training, even when the signals are simu-
lated with a generative adversarial network (GAN).
Furthermore, the results of Krause et al. (2021) indicate that
using speech, noise, and sound events data altogether leads
to better localization performance, even compared to
matched training and test signals.
As for RIR simulation, there exist several methods (and
variants thereof) and acoustic simulation software. Detailing
these methods and software implementations is out of the
scope of this article, but an interested reader may consult
appropriate references (e.g., Rindel, 2000 ; Siltanen et al. ,
2010; Svensson and Kristiansen, 2002 ). Let us only mention
that the simulators based on the image source method (ISM)
(Allen and Berkley, 1979 ) have been widely used in the SSL
community, probably due to the fact that they offer a rela-
tively good trade-off between the simulation ﬁdelity, in par-
ticular regarding the “head” of an RIR, i.e., the direct
propagation and early reﬂections ( Rindel, 2000 ), and com-
putational complexity. Among publicly available libraries,
the RIR generator of Habets (2006), the related signal gener-
ator ( Habets, 2022 ), the Roomsim toolbox of Campbell
et al. (2005), and its extension to mobile sources called
Roomsimove ( Vincent and Campbell, 2008 ), the Spherical
Microphone Impulse Response (SMIR) generator of Jarrett
et al. (2012), the Pyroomacoustics toolbox of Scheibler
et al. (2018), and the Multichannel Room Acoustics
Simulator (MCRoomSim) of Wabnitz et al. (2010), are very
popular. Such libraries have been used by, e.g., Bianco et al.
(2020); Chakrabarty and Habets (2019b) ; Grumiaux et al.
(2021a); Li et al. (2018); Nguyen et al. (2020a); Perotin
et al. (2019b); Salvati et al. (2018); Varanasi et al. (2020).
An efﬁcient open-source implementation of the ISM
method, relying on graphic processing unit (GPU) accelera-
tion, has been recently presented by Diaz-Guerra et al.
(2021a) and used in Diaz-Guerra et al. (2021b) to simulate
moving sources.
Other improved models based on the ISM have also
been used to simulate impulse responses, such as the one
presented by Hirvonen (2015) . This model relies on that of
Lehmann and Johansson (2010) , which adds a diffuse rever-
beration model to the original ISM method. H€ubner et al.
(2021) proposed a low-complexity model-based training
data generation method that includes a deterministic model
for the direct path and a statistical model for late
reverberation. It has been demonstrated that the SSL neural
network, trained using the data generated by this method,
achieves comparable localization performance as the same
architecture trained on a dataset generated by the usual ISM.
However, the proposed simulation method is computation-
ally more efﬁcient. An investigation of several simulation
methods was done by Gelderblom et al. (2021), with exten-
sions of ISM, namely, ISM with directional sources, and
ISM with a diffuse ﬁeld due to scattering. Gelderblom et al.
(2021) compared the simulation algorithms via the training
of an MLP (in both regression and classiﬁcation modes) and
showed that ISM with scattering effects and directional
sources leads to the best SSL performance. More sophisti-
cated software, such as ICARE
VR
(Bouatouch et al. , 2006 ),
often combine ISM with efﬁcient ray-tracing and statistical
methods, permitting simulation of more complicated room
geometries and acoustic effects. Note, however, that none of
the methods based on approximating the sound propagation
by geometrical acoustics is capable of precisely simulating
certain wave phenomena, such as diffraction ( Kuttruff,
2016).
Training and testing binaural SSL systems require
either directly using signals recorded in a binaural setup (see
next subsection) or using a dataset of two-channel BIRs and
convolving these BIRs with (speech/audio) dry signals, just
like for simulations in conventional set-up. Most of the
time, the BIRs are recorded ones (see next subsection; there
exist a few BIR simulators, but we will not detail this quite
speciﬁc aspect here). To take into account the room acous-
tics in a real-world SSL application, BIR effects are often
combined with RIR effects. This is not obtained by trivially
cascading the BIR and RIR ﬁlters, since the BIR depends on
the source DoA, meaning that one would have to integrate it
with RIR components from many incoming directions
(Bernsch€utz, 2016 ). However, such a process is included in
several RIR simulators, which are able to produce the corre-
sponding combined response, called the binaural room
impulse response (BRIR), e.g., ( Campbell et al. , 2005 ).
Recall that BIRs are often manipulated in the frequency
domain (referred as HRTFs), where they are a function of
both frequency and source DoA.
B. Real data
Collecting real labeled data is crucial to assessing the
robustness of an SSL neural network in a real-world envi-
ronment. However, it is a cumbersome task. As of today,
only a few datasets of such recordings exist. Among them,
several impulse response datasets are publicly available and
have been used to generate training and/or testing data.
The distant-speech interaction for robust home applica-
tions (DIRHA) simulated corpus presented by Cristoforetti
et al. (2014) has been used to simulate microphone speech
signals based on real RIRs, recorded in a multi-room envi-
ronment ( Vecchiotti et al. , 2018 ; Vesperini et al. , 2016 ).
Another database consisting of recorded RIRs from three
rooms with different acoustic characteristics is publicly
132 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


available (Hadad et al., 2014), using three microphone array
conﬁgurations to capture signals from several source azi-
muth positions in the range ½/C0 90/C14; 90/C14/C138. The RIR dataset
published by Fernandez-Grande et al. (2021) is intended to
be used for DoA estimation and contains measurements
from a three-channel array. Other RIR datasets have been
published by, e.g., Sz€oke et al. (2019), Eaton et al. (2015),
Hahmann et al. (2021a), Koyama et al. (2021),
Kristoffersen et al. (2021), and Riezu and Grande (2021) .
The last four were initially designed for sound ﬁeld analysis
and synthesis, and they contain measurements from single-
channel microphones (i.e., not microphone arrays).
However, the acquired RIRs correspond to multiple posi-
tions within a room and could be potentially used to emulate
microphone arrays.
As for BIR dataset recordings, a physical head-and-
torso simulator (HATS) (aka “dummy head”) is used, with
ear microphones plugged into the dummy head ears. To iso-
late head and torso effects from other environmental effects
such as reverberation, binaural recordings are generally
made in an anechoic room. For example, the dataset pub-
lished by Thiemann and Van De Par (2015) was collected
using four different dummy heads and used for SSL by
Roden et al. (2015).
The Surrey Binaural Room Impulse Responses database
was published by Francombe (2017) and has been used for
SSL by, e.g., Ma et al. (2015) to synthesize signals for eval-
uating the proposed method. This database has been
recorded using a HATS in four room conﬁgurations, with
sound coming from loudspeakers. It thus combines binaural
effects with room effects.
Several challenges have also been organized for some
years, and evaluation datasets with real recordings have
been constituted to assess the candidate systems. Datasets
were created for the SELD task of the DCASE Challenge, in
2019 ( Adavanne et al., 2019c ), 2020 ( Politis et al., 2020a ),
and 2021 ( Politis et al., 2021). These datasets contain sound
events in reverberant and noisy environments, synthesized
from recordings of real RIRs. These data come in two four-
microphone spatial audio formats: tetrahedral microphone
array and FOA. The dataset comprises 12 sound event types,
including, e.g., barking dog, female/male speech, or ringing,
with up to three simultaneous events overlapping. In the
2019 dataset, the sources are static, whereas they are both
static and moving in the 2020 and 2021 datasets, with more
diverse acoustic conditions. Finally, in the 2021 edition of
the DCASE dataset, additional sound events have been
added to the recordings to play the role of (directional) inter-
ferers (that are not bound to be classiﬁed). These datasets
have been used in many SSL systems (e.g., Cao et al. ,
2019a; Cao et al., 2020; Grondin et al., 2019; Mazzon et al.,
2019; Naranjo-Alcazar et al. , 2020 ; Park et al. , 2019b ;
Shimada et al. , 2020b ; Wang et al. , 2020 ). Very recently,
another SELD challenge focused on 3D sound has been
announced ( Guizzo et al. , 2021 ), where a pair of FOA
microphones was used to capture a large number of RIRs in
an ofﬁce room, from which the audio data were generated.
The acoustic source Localization and Tracking
(LOCATA) challenge ( Evers et al. , 2020 ) has been one of
the most comprehensive challenges targeting the localiza-
tion of speech sources. The challenge tasks include single
and multiple SSL, each of which are a setting where the
sources and/or microphones are static or mobile. The record-
ings have been made using several types of microphone
arrays, namely, the planar array from Brutti et al. (2010),
the em32 Eigenmike spherical array, a hearing aid, and a set
of microphones mounted on a robot head. The ground truth
data include position information obtained through an opti-
cal tracking system, hand-labeled VAD metadata, and dry
(or close-talking) source signals. This dataset has been used
in a number of works to validate the effectiveness of a pro-
posed method on “real-life” recordings (e.g., Diaz-Guerra
et al., 2021b ; Grumiaux et al., 2021a ; Pak and Shin, 2019 ;
Sundar et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2019; Varanasi et al., 2020;
Yang et al., 2021b).
A few audio-visual datasets have also been developed
and are publicly available, in which the audio data are
enriched with video information. This type of dataset is ded-
icated to the development and testing of audio-visual locali-
zation and tracking techniques, which are out of the scope
of this survey paper. Among these corpora, the AV16.3 cor-
pus ( Lathoud et al. , 2004 ) and the CHIL database
(Stiefelhagen et al., 2007) have provided an evaluative basis
for several (purely audio) SSL systems ( Vera-Diaz et al. ,
2018, 2020, 2021) by considering only the audio part of the
audiovisual dataset.
Finally, we also found a series of papers in which neural
networks were tested using real data speciﬁcally recorded
for the presented work in the researchers’ own laboratories,
(e.g., Chazan et al. , 2019 ; Grumiaux et al. , 2021a ;
Grumiaux et al., 2021b ; He et al., 2018a ; He et al., 2021a ;
Le Moing et al., 2020 ; Nguyen et al., 2020a ; Perotin et al.,
2019a; Perotin et al., 2018b; Varanasi et al., 2020).
C. Data augmentation techniques
To limit the massive use of simulated data, which can
limit the robustness of the network on real-world data, and
to overcome the limitation in the amount of real data, sev-
eral authors have proposed resorting to data augmentation
techniques. Without producing more recordings, data aug-
mentation allows for the creation of additional training
examples, often leading to improved network performance.
For the DCASE Challenge, many submitted systems
were trained using data augmentation techniques on the train
dataset. Mazzon et al. (2019) proposed and evaluated three
techniques to augment the training data, taking advantage of
the FOA representation used by their SSL neural network:
swap or inversion of FOA channels, label-oriented rotation
(the rotation is applied to result in the desired label), or
channel-oriented rotation (the rotation is directly applied
with the desired matrix). Interestingly, the channel-oriented
rotation method gave the worst results in their experiments,
while the other two methods showed an improvement in
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 133
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


neural network performance. Zhang et al. (2019a) applied
the SpecAugment method of Park et al. (2019a), which led
to new data examples by masking certain time frames or fre-
quencies of a spectrogram, or both at the same time. This
method was also employed by, e.g., Bai et al. (2021);
Krause et al. (2021); Shimada et al. (2021); Yalta et al.
(2021). In the work of Pratik et al. (2019), new training
material was created with the Mixup method of Zhang et al.
(2018), which relies on convex combinations of an existing
training data pair. Noh et al. (2019) used pitch shifting and
block mixing data augmentation ( Salamon and Bello, 2017 ).
The techniques of Mazzon et al. (2019) and Zhang et al.
(2019a) were employed by Shimada et al. (2021) and
Shimada et al. (2020b) to create new mixtures, along with
another data augmentation method proposed by Takahashi
et al. (2016), which is based on random mixing of two train-
ing signals.
Wang et al. (2021) applied four new data augmentation
techniques to the DCASE dataset ( Politis et al., 2021 ). The
ﬁrst one applies the beneﬁt of the FOA format to changing
the location of the sources by swapping audio channels. The
second method is based on the extraction of spatial and
spectral information on the sources, which are then modiﬁed
and recombined to create new training examples. The third
one relies on mixing multiple examples, resulting in new
multi-source labelled mixtures. The fourth technique is
based on random TF masking. The authors evaluated the
beneﬁts of these data augmentation methods both when used
separately and when applied sequentially.
VIII. LEARNING STRATEGIES
In a general manner, when training a neural network to
accomplish a certain task, one needs to choose a training
paradigm that often depends on the type and amount of
available data. In the DNN-based SSL literature, most of the
systems rely on supervised learning, although several exam-
ples of semi-supervised and weakly supervised learning can
also be found.
A. Supervised learning
When training a neural network with supervised learn-
ing, the training dataset must contain the output target (also
known as the label, especially in the classiﬁcation mode) for
each corresponding input data. A cost function (or loss func-
tion) is used to quantify the error between the output target
and the actual output of the neural network for a given input
data, and training consists of minimizing the average loss
function over the training dataset. We have seen in Sec. VI
that in a single-source SSL scenario with the classiﬁcation
paradigm, a softmax output function is generally used. In
that case, the cost function is generally the categorical
cross-entropy (e.g., Chakrabarty and Habets, 2017a ; Perotin
et al., 2018b ; Yalta et al., 2017 ). When dealing with multi-
ple sources, still with the classiﬁcation paradigm, sigmoid
activation functions and a binary cross-entropy loss function
are used (e.g., Chakrabarty and Habets, 2017b ; Grumiaux
et al. , 2021a ; Perotin et al. , 2019b ). With a regression
scheme, the choice for the cost function is the mean square
error in most systems, e.g., ( Adavanne et al. , 2019a ; He
et al. , 2021a ; Krause et al. , 2020a ; Nguyen et al. , 2018 ;
Pertil€a and Cakir, 2017 ; Salvati et al., 2018; Shimada et al.,
2020a). We also sometimes witness the use of other cost
functions, such as the angular error ( Perotin et al. , 2019a )
and the ‘1-norm (Jenrungrot et al., 2020).
The limitation of supervised training is that the training
relies on a great amount of labeled training data, whereas
only a few real-world datasets with limited size have been
collected for SSL. These datasets are not sufﬁcient for
robust training with DL models. To cope with these issues,
one can opt for a data simulation method, as seen in Sec.
VII A, or data augmentation techniques, as seen in Sec.
VII C. Otherwise, alternative training strategies can be
employed, such as semi-supervised and weakly supervised
learning, as presented hereafter.
B. Semi-supervised and weakly supervised learning
Unsupervised learning refers to model training with a
dataset that does not contain labels. In the present SSL
framework, this means that we would have a dataset of
recorded acoustic signals without the knowledge of source
position/direction, and hence unsupervised learning alone is
not applicable to SSL in practice. Semi-supervised learning
refers to when part of the learning is done in a supervised
manner, and another part is done in an unsupervised manner.
Usually, the network is pre-trained with labeled data train-
ing and reﬁned (or ﬁne-tuned) using unsupervised learning,
i.e., without resorting to labels. In the SSL literature, semi-
supervised learning has been proposed to improve the per-
formance of the neural network on conditions unseen during
supervised training or on real data, compared to its perfor-
mance when trained only in the supervised manner. It can
be seen as an alternative manner to enrich a labeled training
dataset of too limited size or conditions (see Sec. VII).
For example, Takeda and Komatani (2017) and Takeda
et al. (2018) adapted a pre-trained neural network to unseen
conditions in a unsupervised way. For the cost function, the
cross-entropy was modiﬁed to be computed only with the
estimated output, so that the overall entropy was minimized.
They also applied a parameter selection method dedicated to
avoid overﬁtting, as well as early stopping. Bianco et al.
(2020) combined supervised and unsupervised learning
using a VAE-based system. A generative network was
trained to infer the phase of RTFs, which were used as input
features in a classiﬁer network. The cost function directly
encompasses a supervised term and an unsupervised term
and, during the training, the examples can come with or
without labels.
Le Moing et al. (2021) proposed a semi-supervised
approach to adapt the network to real-world data after it was
trained with a simulated dataset. This strategy was imple-
mented with adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
In the present SSL context, a discriminator network was
134 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


trained to label incoming data as synthetic or real, and the
generator network learned to fool the discriminator. This
enabled the adaptation of the DoA estimation network to
infer from real data.
A different kind of training, named weakly supervised,
was used by He et al. (2019a) and He et al. (2021a). The
authors ﬁne-tuned a pre-trained neural network by adapting
the cost function to account for weak labels, which is the
NoS, presumably known. This helped to improve the net-
work performance by reducing the amount of incoherent
predictions. Weak supervision was also used by Opochinsky
et al. (2019). Under the assumption that only a few training
data come with labels, a triplet loss function is computed.
For each training step, three examples are drawn: a query
sample, acting as a usual example, a positive sample close
to the query sample, and a negative sample from a more
remote source position. The triplet loss (named so because
of these three components) is then derived so that the net-
work learns to infer the position of the positive sample
closer to the query sample than the negative sample.
IX. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
In this paper, we have presented a comprehensive over-
view of the literature on SSL techniques based on DL meth-
ods from 2011 to 2021. We attempted to categorize the
many publications in this domain according to different
characteristics of the methods in terms of source (mixture)
conﬁguration, neural network architecture, input data type,
output strategy, training, and test datasets, and learning
strategy. Tables II–V summarize our survey: They gather
the references of the reviewed DL-based SSL papers with
the main characteristics of the proposed methods (the ones
that were used in our taxonomy of the different methods)
being reported into different columns. We believe these
tables can be very useful for a quick search of methods with
a given set of characteristics.
To conclude this survey paper, we can comment on
some current trends and draw a series of perspectives on the
future directions that would be interesting to investigate to
improve the performance of SSL systems and gain a better
understanding of their behavior. Note that some of these
perspectives appeal to general methodological issues in
deep learning that are common to many applications, and
some others are more speciﬁc to SSL. Note also that this list
of research directions is not meant to be exhaustive.
A. Adaptation to (limited sets of) real-world data
In a general manner, we observe a drop in performance
when DNNs trained on simulated data are tested on real-
world signals. This effect is well-known in the DL research
in general, it is a particular case of the poor generalization
capability of DNNs in the case of signiﬁcant train-test data
mismatch (Goodfellow et al., 2016; LeCun et al., 2015). We
recall that this problem remains particularly crucial in SSL
due to the difﬁculty of developing massive labeled datasets
(i.e., with reliable annotations of ground-truth source
location) and the use of simulated training data. This is valid
for training datasets generated using the usual “shoebox”
acoustic simulations. Such geometry is rarely encountered
in real-world environments. Moreover, the placement of the
simulated microphone array is often unrealistic (e.g., it is
ﬂoating in the air, whereas a practical recording device is
often positioned on a table, leading to strong reﬂections).
A ﬁrst approach to tackle this problem is to consider
more sophisticated room acoustics simulators, capable of
taking into account more complex room geometries and
acoustic phenomena, such as scattering or diffraction, see
the related discussion in Sec. VII A. However, this presents
the limitation of a heavier computation cost, which should
be balanced with the amount of data to be generated.
Another line of research is to progressively train the network
with more and more realistic signals, e.g., ﬁrst with signals
generated with simulated SRIRs, then ﬁne-tuning the net-
work with signals generated with real SRIRs, then further
ﬁne-tuning it with recorded data. This is in line with the gen-
eral methodology of domain adaptation (DA) ( Kouw and
Loog, 2019 ) and transfer learning ( Bengio, 2012 ; Zhuang
et al., 2020) used in many applications of DL, which aims at
improving the performance of a network on a particular
domain (in our case, real-world data) after it has been
trained on another domain (here, simulated data). For SSL,
the idea is to “optimize” the model to the target acoustic
environment and/or sound sources. DA is a promising
research ﬁeld on its own, and it has only recently attracted
the attention of the SSL community. To our best knowledge,
the adversarial approach of Le Moing et al. (2021) and the
entropy-based adaptation of Takeda and Komatani (2017)
are the only representatives of DA for SSL.
Another line of research would be to inspire from
weakly-supervised SSL methods based on manifold learning
(Laufer-Goldshtein et al. , 2020 ). The general principle is
that the high-dimensional multichannel observed data live in
a low-dimensional acoustic space, controlled by a limited
number of latent variables (mainly, room dimensions,
source and microphone positions, and reﬂection coefﬁ-
cients). This low-dimensional space, or manifold, can be
identiﬁed using a large set of unlabeled data and unsuper-
vised data dimension reduction techniques. Then a limited
set of labeled data can be used to identify the relationship
between observed data and source positions “in the man-
ifold,” and thus estimate the source positions from new
observed data (using, e.g., interpolation techniques). This
principle was largely developed by Laufer-Goldshtein et al.
(2020), who proposed several non-deep manifold identiﬁca-
tion techniques and corresponding SSL algorithms. The
same principle can be applied with a DL approach, in partic-
ular with deep latent-variable generative models such as the
VAE, in the line with the semi-supervised VAE-SSL model
of Bianco et al. (2021) and Bianco et al. (2020) already
mentioned in Sec. IV G 2 (see also an example of weakly
supervised VAE-based source-ﬁlter decomposition of
speech signals by Sadok et al. , 2022 ). To our knowledge,
SSL based on “deep manifold learning” is still a largely
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 135
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


TABLE II. Summary of DL-based SSL systems published from 2011 to 2018, organized in chronological then alphabetical order. Type: R, regression, C, classiﬁcation. Learning: S, supervised, SS, semi-
supervised, WS, weakly supervised. Sources: NoS, considered number of sources; Kno. indicates if the NoS is known or not before estimating the DoA ( , yes, ,n o ) ,Mov. speciﬁes if moving sources are consid-
ered. Data: SA, synthetic anechoic; RA, real anechoic; SR, synthetic reverberant; RR, real reverberant.
Author Year Architecture Type Learning Input features Output
Sources Data
NoS Kno. Mov.
Train Test
SA RA SR RR SA RA SR RR
Kim and Ling (2011) 2011 MLP R S Power of multiple beams h 1-5         
Tsuzuki et al. (2013) 2013 MLP R S Time delay, phase delay, sound pressure diff. h 1   
Youssef et al. (2013) 2013 MLP R S ILD, ITD h 1    
Hirvonen (2015) 2015 CNN C S Magnitude spectrograms h 1         
Ma et al. (2015) 2015 MLP C S Binaural cross correlation þ ILD h 1-3         
Roden et al. (2015) 2015 MLP C S ILD, ITD, binaural magnitude þ phase spectrogr., h / / / r 1         
binaural real þ imaginary spectrograms
Xiao et al. (2015) 2015 MLP C S GCC-PHAT h 1         
Takeda and Komatani (2016b) 2016 MLP C S Complex eigenvectors from correlation matrix h, z, r 0-1   
Takeda and Komatani (2016a) 2016 MLP C S Complex eigenvectors from correlation matrix h 0-2   
Vesperini et al. (2016) 2016 MLP R S GCC-PHAT x, y 1        
Zermini et al. (2016) 2016 AE C S Mixing vector þ ILD þ IPD h         
Chakrabarty and Habets (2017a) 2017 CNN C S Phase map h 1         
Chakrabarty and Habets (2017b) 2017 CNN C S Phase map h 2         
Pertil€a and Cakir (2017) 2017 CNN R S Magnitude spectrograms TF Mask 1         
Takeda and Komatani (2017) 2017 MLP C SS Complex eigenvectors from correlation matrix h, / 1   
Yalta et al. (2017) 2017 Res. CNN C S Magnitude spectrograms h 1         
Yiwere and Rhee (2017) 2017 MLP C S Binaural cross correlation þ ILD h, d 1         
Adavanne et al. (2018) 2018 CRNN C S Magnitude þ phase spectrograms SPS, h, / 1         
He et al. (2018a) 2018 MLP, CNN C S GCC-PHAT h 0-2 /        
He et al. (2018b) 2018 Res. CNN C S Real þ imaginary spectrograms h 1         
Huang et al. (2018) 2018 DNN R S Waveforms dry signal 1         
Li et al. (2018) 2018 CRNN C S GCC-PHAT h 1         
Ma and Liu (2018) 2018 CNN C S CPS x, y 3   
Nguyen et al. (2018) 2018 CNN R S ILD þ IPD h, / 1         
Perotin et al. (2018b) 2018 CRNN C S Intensity h, / 1         
Salvati et al. (2018) 2018 CNN C/R S Narrowband SRP components SRP weights 1  ?   
Sivasankaran et al. (2018) 2018 CNN C S IPD h 1         
Suvorov et al. (2018) 2018 Res. CNN C S Waveforms h 1         
Takeda et al. (2018) 2018 MLP C SS Complex eigenvectors from correlation matrix h 1   
Thuillier et al. (2018) 2018 CNN C S Ipsilateral þ contralateral ear input signal / 1         
Vecchiotti et al. (2018) 2018 CNN R S GCC-PHAT þ mel spectrograms x, y 1         
Vera-Diaz et al. (2018) 2018 CNN R S Waveforms x, y, z 1         
136 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


TABLE III. Summary of DL-based SSL systems published in 2019, organized in alphabetical order. See Table I’s caption for acronyms speciﬁcation.
Author Year Architecture Type Learning Input features Output
Sources Data
NoS Kno. Mov.
Train Test
SA RA SR RR SA RA SR RR
Adavanne et al. (2019a) 2019 CRNN R S FOA magnitude þ phase spectrograms x, y, z 1   
Adavanne et al. (2019b) 2019 CRNN R S FOA magnitude þ phase spectrograms x, y, z 1   
Cao et al. (2019a) 2019 CRNN R S Log-Mel spectrogr. þ GCC-PHAT þ intensity h, / 1      
Cao et al. (2019b) 2019 CRNN R S Log-Mel spectrogr. þ GCC-PHAT h, / 1      
Chakrabarty and Habets (2019a) 2019 CNN C S Phase map h 2       
Chakrabarty and Habets (2019b) 2019 CNN C S Phase map h 2       
Chazan et al. (2019) 2019 U-net C S Phase map of the RTF between each mic pair h 1      
Chytas and Potamianos (2019) 2019 CNN R S Waveforms h, / 1      
Comminiello et al. (2019) 2019 CRNN R S Quaternion FOA x, y, z 1   
Grondin et al. (2019) 2019 CRNN R S CPS þ GCC-PHAT h, / 1      
He et al. (2019a) 2019 Res. CNN C WS Real þ imaginary spectrograms h 1-2      
Huang et al. (2019) 2019 CNN R S Waveforms dry signal 1       
Kapka and Lewandowski (2019) 2019 CRNN R S Magnitude þ phase spectrograms x, y, z 1-2      
Kong et al. (2019) 2019 CNN R S Log-Mel magnitude FOA spectrograms h, / 1      
Krause and Kowalczyk (2019) 2019 CRNN R S Magnitude / phase spectrograms h, / 1      
K€uc¸ €uk et al. (2019) 2019 CNN C S Real þ imaginary spectrograms h 1        
Kujawski et al. (2019) 2019 Res. CNN R S Beamforming map x, y 1   
Leung and Ren (2019) 2019 CRNN R S CPS þ real/imag. spectro þ mag./phase spectro h, / 1      
Lin and Wang (2019) 2019 CRNN C S Magnitude and phase spectrograms h, / 1      
Lu (2019) 2019 CRNN R S GCC-PHAT h, / 1      
Maruri et al. (2019) 2019 CRNN R S GCC-PHAT þ magnitude þ phase spectrograms h, / 1      
Mazzon et al. (2019) 2019 CRNN R S Mel-spectrograms þ GCC-PHAT/intensity h, / 1      
Noh et al. (2019) 2019 CNN C S GCC-PHAT h, / 1      
Nustede and Anem€uller (2019) 2019 CRNN R S Group delays h, / 1      
Opochinsky et al. (2019) 2019 MLP R WS RTFs h 1       
Pak and Shin (2019) 2019 MLP R S IPD (clean) IPD       
Pang et al. (2019) 2019 CNN R S ILD þ IPD h, / 1      
Park et al. (2019b) 2019 CRNN R S Log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity h, / 1      
Perotin et al. (2019b) 2019 CRNN C S FOA pseudo-intensity h, / 2       
Perotin et al. (2019a) 2019 CRNN C/R S FOA pseudo-intensity h, / / x, y, z 1       
Pratik et al. (2019) 2019 CRNN R S GCC-PHAT þ Mel/Bark spectrograms h, / 1      
Pujol et al. (2019) 2019 Res. CNN R S Waveforms x, y 1    
Ranjan et al. (2019) 2019 Res. CRNN C S Log-Mel spectrograms h, / 1      
Sudo et al. (2019) 2019 CRNN R S cos(IPD), sin(IPD) cos ðhÞ; sinðhÞ,1      
cosð/Þ; sinð/Þ
Tang et al. (2019) 2019 CRNN C/R S FOA pseudo-intensity h, / / x, y, z 1      
Vecchiotti et al. (2019b) 2019 CNN R S GCC-PHAT þ Mel-spectrograms x, y 1        
Vecchiotti et al. (2019a) 2019 CNN C S Waveforms h 1   
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 137
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


under-considered and open topic in the literature, yet it
offers a promising direction to deal with limited annotated
datasets.
B. Flexibility of the trained models
As opposed to conventional SP techniques, which can
be parameterized to adapt to the changes in the system
setup, DL methods for SSL generally assume identical set-
ups for the training and the inference phase. Particularly, the
number, geometrical arrangement, and the directivity of the
microphones composing an array are usually assumed to be
ﬁxed. This is a serious disadvantage since the network needs
to be retrained for different microphone arrays, although the
task (SSL) remains the same. A partial remedy is to use
array-agnostic inputs, such as Ambisonics (e.g., Adavanne
et al., 2018 ; Grumiaux et al., 2021a ; Perotin et al., 2019b ),
CPS eigenvectors (e.g., Takeda and Komatani, 2016b ), or
spatial pseudo-spectra (e.g., Nguyen et al., 2020a; Wu et al.,
2021a). Another possibility is to adopt array-invariant tech-
niques from end-to-end multichannel speech enhancement
(Luo et al., 2020).
Moreover, one could apply transfer learning and DA
techniques, discussed previously, that could enable the mod-
els trained for a particular microphone array to adapt to
another. Such techniques could not only be beneﬁcial for the
changes in microphone array setups but also the changes in
the input signal parameters, such as the sampling rate,
frame, and overlap length, as well as the type of the STFT
window function. A radical approach would be to make the
method inherently independent of parameterization, by
treating the input signal as a point cloud, as recently sug-
gested by Subramani and Smaragdis (2021) .
C. Multi-task learning
Multi-task training is a general methodology to improve
the performance of a DNN-based system on a given task by
training the model to jointly and simultaneously tackle sev-
eral other tasks ( Ruder, 2017; Zhang and Yang, 2021 ). It has
been observed in practice that this often leads to better per-
formance on the ﬁrst target task. This principle is most often
implemented in the following manner: An early part of the
model (e.g., a common feature extraction module composed
of several layers or several layer blocks) is common for the
different tasks, then the model splits into different branches,
each one specialized in one of the different tasks. The com-
mon part is assumed to allow the discovery of an efﬁcient
signal representation, and the fact that this representation is
used for several downstream tasks somehow reinforces the
efﬁciency of the representation extraction.
This principle can be applied to SSL. In fact, it has
already been extensively illustrated in this survey with the
SELD Task of the DCASE Challenge ( Politis et al., 2020b )
and the many candidates that have been proposed to this
challenge (and that we have reported in this survey). The
vast majority of the candidate DNNs follow the previously
established architecture, with a common feature extraction
TABLE III. (Continued.)
Author Year Architecture Type Learning Input features Output
Sources Data
NoS Kno. Mov.
Train Test
SA RA SR RR SA RA SR RR
Wang et al. (2019) 2019 RNN R S Magnitude spectrograms TF Mask 1      
Xue et al. (2019) 2019 CRNN R S Log-Mel spectr. þ CQT þ phase spectrogr. þ CPS h, / 1      
Zhang et al. (2019a) 2019 CRNN R S Magnitude and phase spectrograms h, / 1      
Zhang et al. (2019b) 2019 CNN C S Phase spectrograms h 1       
138 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


TABLE IV. Summary of DL-based SSL systems published in 2020, organized in alphabetical order. See the Table I caption for acronyms speciﬁcation.
Author Year Architecture Type Learn. Input features Output
Sources Data
NoS Kno. Mov.
Train Test
SA RA SR RR SA RA SR RR
Bianco et al. (2020) 2020 VAE C SS RTFs h 1       
Cao et al. (2020) 2020 CRNN R S FOA waveforms h, / 0-2      
Comanducci et al. (2020a) 2020 CNN/U-Net C S GCC-PHAT x, y 1         
Comanducci et al. (2020b) 2020 U-Net R S GCC Clean GCC 1         
Fahim et al. (2020) 2020 CNN C S FOA modal coherence h, / 1-7       
Hao et al. (2020) 2020 CNN C S Real þ imaginary spectrograms þ spectral ﬂux h 1      
Huang et al. (2020) 2020 AE R S Waveforms h 1   
H€ubner et al. (2021) 2020 CNN C S Phase map h 1      
Jenrungrot et al. (2020) 2020 U-Net R S Waveforms h 0-8       
Mack et al. (2020) 2020 CNN þ attention C S Phase map h 2       
Le Moing et al. (2020) 2020 AE C,R S Real þ imaginary spectrograms x, y 1-3        
Le Moing et al. (2021) 2020 AE C SS Real þ imaginary spectrograms x, y 1-3      
Naranjo-Alcazar et al. (2020) 2020 Res. CRNN R S Log-Mel magnitude spectrograms þ GCC-PHAT x, y, z 1      
Nguyen et al. (2020a) 2020 CNN C S Spatial pseudo-spectrum h 0-4       
Nguyen et al. (2020b) 2020 CRNN R S DoAs from histogram-based method h, / 1      
Nguyen et al. (2020c) 2020 CRNN R S DoAs from histogram-based method h, / 1      
Park et al. (2020) 2020 CRNN R S Log-Mel energy þ intensity h, / 1      
Patel et al. (2020) 2020 U-Net R S Mel-spectrograms x, y, z 1      
Phan et al. (2020a) 2020 CRNN þ SA R S FOA log-Mel spectrograms þ active/reactive x, y, z 1      
intensity, or GCC-PHAT
Phan et al. (2020b) 2020 CRNN þ SA R S FOA log-Mel spectrograms þ active/reactive x, y, z 1      
intensity, or GCC-PHAT
Ronchini et al. (2020) 2020 CRNN R S FOA log-Mel spectrograms þ log-Mel intensity x, y, z 1      
Sampathkumar and Kowerko (2020) 2020 CRNN R S MIC þ FOA Mel spectrograms þ active intensity h, / 1      
þ GCC-PHAT
Shimada et al. (2020a) 2020 Res. CRNN R S FOA magnitude spectrograms þ IPD ACCDOA 1      
Shimada et al. (2020b) 2020 Res. CRNN R S FOA magnitude spectrograms þ IPD ACCDOA 1      
Singla et al. (2020) 2020 CRNN R S FOA log-Mel spectrograms þ log-Mel intensity x, y, z 1      
Song (2020) 2020 CRNN R S GCC-PHAT þ FOA active intensity x, y, z 1      
Sundar et al. (2020) 2020 Res. CNN C/R S Waveforms d, h 1-3    
Tian (2020) 2020 CRNN ? S Ambisonics ? ?      
Varanasi et al. (2020) 2020 CNN C S 3rd spherical harmonics (phase or phase þmagnitude) h, / 1       
Varzandeh et al. (2020) 2020 CNN C S GCC-PHAT þ periodicity degree h 0-1         
Vera-Diaz et al. (2020) 2020 AE R S GCC-PHAT time-delay 1      
Wang et al. (2020) 2020 Res. CRNN R S FOA pseudo-intensity þ FOA log-Mel spectrograms x, y, z 1      
þ GCC-PHAT
Xue et al. (2020) 2020 CRNN C S CPS þ waveforms þ beamforming output h, / 1      
Yasuda et al. (2020) 2020 Res. CRNN R S FOA log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity denoised IV 2      
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 139
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


TABLE V. Summary of DL-based SSL systems published in 2021, organized in alphabetical order. See the Table I caption for acronyms speciﬁcation.
Author Year Architecture Type Learn. Input features Output
Sources Data
NoS Kno. Mov.
Train Test
SA RA SR RR SA RA SR RR
Adavanne et al. (2021) 2021 CRNN þ SA R S FOA Mel spectrograms þ intensity þ GCC-PHAT x,y,z 2      
Bai et al. (2021) 2021 Res. CRNN R S Log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity x, y, z 1      
Bianco et al. (2021) 2021 VAE C SS RTF h 1       
Bohlender et al. (2021) 2021 CNN/CRNN C S Phase map h 1-3      
Bologni et al. (2021) 2021 CNN C S Waveforms h, d 1       
Cao et al. (2021) 2021 SA R S Log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity x, y, z 0-2      
Castellini et al. (2021) 2021 MLP R S real þ imaginary CPS x, y 1-3         
Diaz-Guerra et al. (2021b) 2021 CNN R S SRP-PHAT power map x, y, z 1       
Emmanuel et al. (2021) 2021 CNN þ SA R S Log-spectrograms þ intensity ACCDOA 1      
Gelderblom et al. (2021) 2021 MLP C/R S GCC-PHAT h 2      
Gonc¸alves Pinto et al. (2021) 2021 CNN R S Magnitude CPS x, y 1-10   
Grumiaux et al. (2021a) 2021 CRNN C S Intensity h, / 1-3       
Grumiaux et al. (2021b) 2021 CNN þ SA C S Intensity h, / 1-3       
Guirguis et al. (2020) 2021 TCN R S Magnitude þ phase spectrograms x, y, z 1   
Hammer et al. (2021) 2021 U-net C S Phase map of the RTF between each mic pair h 1      
He et al. (2021a) 2021 Res. CNN C WS Magnitude þ phase spectrograms h 1-4 /      
He et al. (2021b) 2021 CNN R S Waveforms x, y, z 1   
Huang and Perez (2021) 2021 Res. CNN þ SA R S Waveforms ACCDOA 1      
Komatsu et al. (2020) 2021 CRNN R S FOA magnitude þ phase spectrograms h, / 1   
Krause et al. (2020a) 2021 CNN R S Magnitude þ phase spectrograms x, y, z 1       
Krause et al. (2020b) 2021 CRNN R S Misc. h, / 1      
Lee et al. (2021a) 2021 U-Net R S SRP power map x,y 1-3         
Lee et al. (2021b) 2021 CNN þ attention C S Log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity h 1       
Liu et al. (2021) 2021 CNN C S Intensity h 1       
Naranjo-Alcazar et al. (2021) 2021 Res. CRNN R S Log-Mel spectrograms þ GCC-PHAT ACCDOA 1      
Nguyen et al. (2021a) 2021 CRNN C S Intensity/GCC-PHAT h, / 1   
Nguyen et al. (2021b) 2021 CNN þ RNN/SA R S Log-spectrograms þ DRR þ SCM eigenvectors ACCDOA 1      
Park et al. (2021a) 2021 SA R S log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity x, y, z 1      
Poschadel et al. (2021a) 2021 CRNN C S HOA magnitude þ phase spectrograms h, / 1       
Poschadel et al. (2021b) 2021 CRNN C S HOA magnitude þ phase spectrograms h, / 2-3       
Pujol et al. (2021) 2021 Res. CNN R S Waveforms h, / 1         
Rho et al. (2021) 2021 CRNN þ SA R S Log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity h, / 1   
Schymura et al. (2021) 2021 CNN þ SA R S Magnitude þ phase spectrograms h, / 1      
Schymura et al. (2020) 2021 CNN þ AE þ attent. R S FOA magnitude þ phase spectrograms h, / 1   
Shimada et al. (2021) 2021 Res. CRNN þ SA R S IPD ACCDOA 1      
Subramanian et al. (2021a) 2021 CRNN C/R S Phase spectrogram h 2       
Subramanian et al. (2021b) 2021 CRNN C Phase spectrograms, IPD h 2       
Sudarsanam et al. (2021) 2021 SA R S Log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity ACCDOA 1      
140 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


module followed by two SED and SSL branches. In 2021,
the ACCDOA representation was adopted by many
researchers, see Sec. VI B 2, and allowed for a joint SED
and SSL process up to the very last model layer. We believe
that combining the SSL task with other tasks (alternately to
SED or in addition to it) such as source separation or ASR
could lead to further advances. For example, jointly pro-
ceeding to source counting in addition to SSL in the work of
Grumiaux et al. (2021a) was shown to improve the SSL per-
formance (note that here source counting is explicit and
high-resolution, i.e., it consists in estimating the number of
active sources at the short-term frame level, whereas it is
most often implicit and generally made on a much larger
timescale in the SELD task of the DCASE Challenge).
Other examples of multi-task learning for SSL can be found
in the works of Wu et al. (2021a,b). Combining SSL with
source separation in a DL framework is further discussed
later.
Somewhat different from multi-task approaches, the
end-to-end task-oriented learning of the entire processing
chain (stacked localization, DoA-parameterized beamform-
ing, and ASR blocks) of Subramanian et al. (2021a) repre-
sents a refreshing idea to address the lack of DoA-annotated
data. For instance, by using pre-trained ASR blocks, and by
“freezing” all but the localization part of the system during
training, one could use the abundant labeled speech corpora
as proxy information for the localization task. Such systems
could incorporate both neural network modules and process-
ing blocks based on conventional SP, as discussed in the
next subsection.
D. Combination of DL and conventional SP
techniques
In this survey paper, we have seen how the DL-based
data-driven approach to the SSL problem has somehow
replaced the conventional SP approach over the last decade.
Yet, conventional methods are able to “explicitly” exploit
strong prior knowledge of the physical underlying processes
via signal and propagation models, whereas the exploitation
of the spatial information contained in the mixture signal is
done mostly “implicitly” by DNNs. Therefore, a major per-
spective for SSL is to get the best of both worlds, i.e., the
combination of DL with conventional multichannel SP
techniques.
This can be inspired by what has been done in, e.g.,
speech enhancement and speech/audio source separation. In
the single-channel conﬁguration, DL-based speech enhance-
ment and separation are mostly based on the masking
approach in the TF domain. Binary masks or soft masks
(reminiscent of the well-known single-channel Wiener ﬁlter)
are estimated with DNNs from the noisy signal and applied
to it to obtain a cleaned version, see the review by Wang
and Chen (2018) . For multichannel speech enhancement and
separation, a straightforward approach is to input the multi-
channel signal in the mask estimation network. However,
more clever strategies can be elaborated. For example,
Erdogan et al. (2016), Heymann et al. (2016), and Higuchi
TABLE V. (Continued.)
Author Year Architecture Type Learn. Input features Output
Sources Data
NoS Kno. Mov.
Train Test
SA RA SR RR SA RA SR RR
Vargas et al. (2021) 2021 CNN C S Phase map h 1        
Vera-Diaz et al. (2021) 2021 AE R S GCC-PHAT time-delay 2      
Wang et al. (2021) 2021 SA R S Mel-spectr. þ intensity/Mel-spectr. þ GCC-PHAT x, y, z 1      
Wu et al. (2021b) 2021 AE R S Likelihood surface x, y 1        
Wu et al. (2021a) 2021 CNN AE R S Beamforming heatmap image x, y 1        
Xinghao et al. (2021) 2021 CNN þ SA R S Log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity ACCDOA 1      
Xu et al. (2021a) 2021 DenseNet R S Real CPS x, y 6-25 /       
Yalta et al. (2021) 2021 SA R S Log-Mel spectrograms þ intensity x, y, z 1      
Yang et al. (2021a) 2021 CRNN C S Log-magnitude and phase spectrograms h 1       
Yang et al. (2021b) 2021 CRNN C S Log-magnitude and phase spectrograms h 1       
Zhang et al. (2021) 2021 CNN þ SA R S Log-spectrograms þ intensity þ GCC-PHAT x, y, z 1      
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 141
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


et al. (2017) proposed combining the DNN-based single-
channel masking with beamforming techniques ( Van Veen
and Buckley, 1988 ). In these works, the TF-domain masks
estimated by a DNN are used to select speech-dominant
against noise-dominant TF points, which are then used to
estimate speech and noise spatial covariance matrices,
respectively, which are ﬁnally used to build beamforming
ﬁlters. These papers report better ASR scores than with
direct TF masking or basic beamforming applied separately.
This approach was extended by Perotin et al. (2018a) with
an additional ﬁrst stage of beamforming in the HOA domain
to improve the mask estimation. Joint end-to-end optimiza-
tion of the mask estimator, the beamformer, and possibly an
ASR acoustic model, was considered in the TF domain by
Meng et al. (2017) and Heymann et al. (2017), and in the
time domain by Li et al. (2016d). Closer to source separa-
tion than to beamforming, Nugraha et al. (2016) combined a
DNN trained to estimate a clean speech spectrogram from a
noisy speech spectrogram with the source separation tech-
nique based on the spatial covariance matrix (SCM) model
and Wiener ﬁltering of Duong et al. (2010). Leglaive et al.
(2019) proposed an unsupervised multichannel speech
enhancement system combining a VAE for modeling the
(single-channel) clean speech signal and the SCM model for
modeling the spatial characteristics of the multi-channel
signal.
Although we can ﬁnd many examples of a combination
of DL-based and SP-based approaches for beamforming and
source separation, to our knowledge and as shown by our
survey, this principle has been poorly applied to SSL so far.
Yet, powerful deep models, and in particular deep genera-
tive models such as GANs ( Goodfellow et al., 2014), VAEs
(Kingma and Welling, 2014 ), and dynamical VAEs ( Girin
et al., 2021) are now available to model the temporal and/or
spectral characteristics of sounds and can be combined with
SP-based models. Morevover, as already mentioned earlier
in this survey, the connection between audio source separa-
tion, diarization, and SSL is strong, reciprocal (each task
can help to solve the other ones), and is already exploited in
many conventional systems ( Gannot et al. , 2017 ; Vincent
et al., 2018 ). Future works may thus consider jointly sound
source localization, diarization, and separation/enhancement
in a hybrid approach combining powerful DL models and
conventional SP techniques. General frameworks for the
joint optimization of DNN parameters and “conventional”
parameters are now established and can be exploited ( Engel
et al., 2020; Shlezinger et al., 2020).
E. Moving sources and deep tracking
In this survey, we poorly considered the case of moving
sound sources and the necessity to rely in this case on track-
ing algorithms. These algorithms take as input the results of
SSL obtained individually on each time frame and connect
them through time. This is generally based on the use of a
model of the source dynamics. In the multi-source case,
dynamical models are often combined with source
appearance models (which would model the sound texture
or the different speakers’ voices in the case of audio sig-
nals), resulting in the formation of source tracks with a con-
sistent source “identity” for each of these tracks. Tracking
algorithms also estimate the tracks “birth” and “death,” i.e.,
the time at which the corresponding sources are activated or
inactivated. Such multi-object tracking (MOT) algorithms
have a long history and their detailed description is beyond
the scope of this paper; for a good overview of this domain,
see the review papers of Vo et al. (2015) and Luo et al.
(2021).
More recently, deep approaches to the MOT problem
have emerged, an evolution mostly driven by the computer
vision community ( Ciaparrone et al. , 2020 ). For example,
RNNs have been used in place of the traditional Kalman ﬁl-
ter to model object dynamics for MOT in videos (e.g.,
Babaee et al., 2018; Liang and Zhou, 2018 ; Sadeghian et al.,
2017; Saleh et al. , 2021 ; Xiang et al. , 2019 ). The current
trend is to replace RNNs with Transformer-like models, as
discussed at the end of Sec. IV F, (e.g., Meinhardt et al. ,
2021; Sun et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021b). The combination of
a deep appearance model (automatic speaker recognition,
SED) with a deep dynamical model in a sound source tracking
system is a largely open problem and certainly a key ingredi-
ent for future developments in robust multi-source acoustic
scene analysis in adverse acoustic environments and com-
plex scenarios. Given the problem of annotated data scarcity
in SSL, DL-based sound source localization and tracking
may take inspiration from the unsupervised deep approaches
to the MOT problem recently proposed by several research-
ers (e.g., Crawford and Pineau, 2020 ; He et al. , 2019b ;
Karthik et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022; Luiten et al., 2020).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the French Association for
Technological Research (ANRT CIFRE contract 2019/
0533) and partially funded by the Multidisciplinary Institute
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence MIAI@Grenoble-Alpes (ANR-19-
P3IA-0003).
1Note that this problem is common to DL-based multi-source SSL methods
and conventional methods for which a source activity profile is estimated
and peak-picking algorithms are typically used to select the active
sources.
2In practice, the spatial response of Ambisonic microphones is approxi-
mately frequency-independent only within certain bandwidth (dictated by
the HOA order), due to spatial aliasing in the high frequency range, and
noise amplification at lower frequencies ( Zotter and Frank, 2019 ).
Adavanne, S., Politis, A., Nikunen, J., and Virtanen, T. ( 2019a). “Sound
event localization and detection of overlapping sources using convolu-
tional recurrent neural networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 13(1),
34–48.
Adavanne, S., Politis, A., and Virtanen, T. ( 2018). “Direction of arrival esti-
mation for multiple sound sources using convolutional recurrent neural
network,” in Proceedings of the European Signal Processing Conference
(EUSIPCO), September 3–7, Rome, Italy.
Adavanne, S., Politis, A., and Virtanen, T. ( 2019b). “Localization, detection
and tracking of multiple moving sound sources with a convolutional
recurrent neural network,” in Proceedings of the Detection and
142 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE
Workshop), New York, NY.
Adavanne, S., Politis, A., and Virtanen, T. ( 2019c). “A multi-room rever-
berant dataset for sound event localization and detection,” in Proceedings
of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and Events
Workshop (DCASE Workshop), New York, NY.
Adavanne, S., Politis, A., and Virtanen, T. ( 2021). “Differentiable tracking-
based training of deep learning sound source localizers,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and
Acoustics (WASPAA), October 17–20, New Paltz, NY, pp. 211–215.
Ahmad, M., Muaz, M., and Adeel, M. ( 2021). “A survey of deep neural net-
work in acoustic direction ﬁnding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Digital Futures and Transformative
Technology (ICoDT2), May 24–26, Islamabad, Pakistan.
Allen, J. B., and Berkley, D. A. ( 1979). “Image method for efﬁciently simu-
lating small-room acoustics,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 65(4), 943–950.
Amengual Gar /C19 ı, S. V., Lachenmayr, W., and Mommertz, E. ( 2017).
“Spatial analysis and auralization of room acoustics using a tetrahedral
microphone,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 141(4), EL369–EL374.
Anguera, X., Bozonnet, S., Evans, N., Fredouille, C., Friedland, G., and
Vinyals, O. ( 2012). “Speaker diarization: A review of recent research,”
IEEE Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 20(2), 356–370.
Arberet, S., Gribonval, R., and Bimbot, F. ( 2009). “A robust method to
count and locate audio sources in a multichannel underdetermined
mixture,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 58(1), 121–133.
Argentieri, S., Danes, P., and Soue`res, P. ( 2015). “A survey on sound source
localization in robotics: From binaural to array processing methods,”
Comput. Speech Lang. 34(1), 87–112.
Babaee, M., Li, Z., and Rigoll, G. ( 2018). “Occlusion handling in tracking
multiple people using RNN,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , October 7–10, Athens, Greece,
pp. 2715–2719.
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. ( 2016). “Neural machine translation
by jointly learning to align and translate,” arXiv:1409.0473.
Bai, S., Kolter, J. Z., and Koltun, V. ( 2019). “Trellis networks for sequence
modeling,” arXiv:1810.06682.
Bai, J., Pu, Z., and Chen, J. ( 2021). “DCASE 2021 Task 3: SELD system
based on Resnet and random segment augmentation,” Technical Report,
DCASE 2021 Challenge.
Ban, Y., Li, X., Alameda-Pineda, X., Girin, L., and Horaud, R. ( 2018).
“Accounting for room acoustics in audio-visual multi-speaker tracking,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , April 15–20, Alberta, Canada,
pp. 6553–6557.
Basten, T., de Bree, H., and Sadasivan, S. ( 2008). “Acoustic eyes: A novel
sound source localization and monitoring technique with 3D sound
probes,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Noise
Vibration Engineering (ISMA), September 7–9, Leuven, Belgium.
Benesty, J., Chen, J., and Huang, Y. ( 2008). Microphone Array Signal
Processing (Springer Science & Business Media, New York).
Bengio, Y. ( 2012). “Deep learning of representations for unsupervised and
transfer learning,” in Proceedings of the ICML Workshop Unsupervised
& Transfer Learning, July 2, Bellevue, WA, pp. 17–36.
Bengio, Y., Courville, A., and Vincent, P. ( 2013). “Representation learning:
A review and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
35(8), 1798–1828.
Bernsch€utz, B. ( 2016). “Microphone arrays and sound ﬁeld decomposition
for dynamic binaural recording,” Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universitaet
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
Bialer, O., Garnett, N., and Tirer, T. ( 2019). “Performance advantages of
deep neural networks for angle of arrival estimation,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), May 12–17, Brighton, UK, pp. 3907–3911.
Bianchi, L., Antonacci, F., Sarti, A., and Tubaro, S. ( 2016). “The ray space
transform: A new framework for wave ﬁeld processing,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process. 64(21), 5696–5706.
Bianco, M. J., Gannot, S., Fernandez-Grande, E., and Gerstoft, P. ( 2021).
“Semi-supervised source localization in reverberant environments with
deep generative modeling,” IEEE Access 9, 84956–84970.
Bianco, M. J., Gannot, S., and Gerstoft, P. ( 2020). “Semi-supervised source
localization with deep generative modeling,” in Proceedings of the
MLSP, September 21–24, Eespo, Finland (virtual conference).
Bianco, M. J., Gerstoft, P., Traer, J., Ozanich, E., Roch, M. A., Gannot, S.,
and Deledalle, C.-A. ( 2019). “Machine learning in acoustics: Theory and
applications,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 146(5), 3590–3628.
Blandin, C., Ozerov, A., and Vincent, E. ( 2012). “Multi-source TDOA esti-
mation in reverberant audio using angular spectra and clustering,” Signal
Process. 92(8), 1950–1960.
Bohlender, A., Spriet, A., Tirry, W., and Madhu, N. ( 2021). “Exploiting
temporal context in CNN based multisource DoA estimation,” IEEE/
ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 29, 1594–1608.
Bologni, G., Heusdens, R., and Martinez, J. ( 2021). “Acoustic reﬂectors
localization from stereo recordings using neural networks,” in
Proceedings of the ICASSP , June 6–11, Toronto, Canada (virtual confer-
ence), pp. 1–5.
Bouatouch, K., Deille, O., Maillard, J., Martin, J., and No /C19e, N. ( 2006).
“Real time acoustic rendering of complex environments including diffrac-
tion and curved surfaces,” in Proceedings of the Audio Engineering
Society (AES) Convention, May 20–23, Paris, France.
Brandstein, M., and Ward, D. ( 2001). Microphone Arrays: Signal
Processing Techniques and Applications (Springer Science & Business
Media, New York).
Brutti, A., Cristoforetti, L., Kellermann, W., Marquardt, L., and Omologo,
M. ( 2010). “WOZ acoustic data collection for interactive TV,” Lang.
Resour. Eval. 44(3), 205–219.
Bush, D., and Xiang, N. ( 2018). “A model-based Bayesian framework for
sound source enumeration and direction of arrival estimation using a
coprime microphone array,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 143(6), 3934–3945.
Campbell, D., Palomaki, K., and Brown, G. ( 2005). “A Matlab simulation
of shoebox room acoustics for use in research and teaching,” Comput.
Inform. Syst. 9(3), 48.
Candes, E. J., Romberg, J. K., and Tao, T. ( 2006). “Stable signal recovery
from incomplete and inaccurate measurements,” Comm. Pure Appl.
Math. 59(8), 1207–1223.
Cao, Y., Iqbal, T., Kong, Q., An, F., Wang, W., and Plumbley, M. D.
(2021). “An improved event-independent network for polyphonic sound
event localization and detection,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , June
6–11, Toronto, Canada (virtual conference).
Cao, Y., Iqbal, T., Kong, Q., Galindo, M. B., Wang, W., and Plumbley, M.
D. ( 2019a). “Two-stage sound event localization and detection using
intensity vector and generalized cross-correlation,” Technical Report,
DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Cao, Y., Iqbal, T., Kong, Q., Zhong, Y., Wang, W., and Plumbley, M. D.
(2020). “Event-independent network for polyphonic sound event localiza-
tion and detection,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of
Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , November
2–4, Tokyo, Japan.
Cao, Y., Kong, Q., Iqbal, T., An, F., Wang, W., and Plumbley, M. ( 2019b).
“Polyphonic sound event detection and localization using a two-stage
strategy,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic
Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , October 25–26, New
York, NY.
Castellini, P., Giulietti, N., Falcionelli, N., Dragoni, A. F., and Chiariotti, P.
(2021). “A neural network based microphone array approach to grid-less
noise source localization,” Appl. Acoust. 177, 107947.
Chakrabarty, S., and Habets, E. A. P. ( 2017a). “Broadband DoA estimation
using convolutional neural networks trained with noise signals,” in
Proceedings of the WASPAA, October 19, New Paltz, NY, pp. 136–140.
Chakrabarty, S., and Habets, E. A. P. ( 2017b). “Multi-speaker localization
using convolutional neural network trained with noise,”
arXiv:1712.04276.
Chakrabarty, S., and Habets, E. A. P. ( 2019a). “Multi-scale aggregation of
phase information for reducing computational cost of CNN based DoA
estimation,” inProceedings of EUSIPCO, September 2–6, A Coru~na, Spain.
Chakrabarty, S., and Habets, E. A. P. ( 2019b). “Multi-speaker DoA estima-
tion using deep convolutional networks trained with noise signals,” IEEE
J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 13(1), 8–21.
Chang, S.-Y., Li, B., Simko, G., Sainath, T. N., Tripathi, A., van den Oord,
A., and Vinyals, O. ( 2018). “Temporal modeling using dilated convolu-
tion and gating for voice-activity-detection,” in Proceedings of the
ICASSP, April 15–20, Calgary, Canada, pp. 5549–5553.
Chardon, G., and Daudet, L. ( 2012). “Narrowband source localization in an
unknown reverberant environment using waveﬁeld sparse decomposition,”
in Proceedings of the ICASSP, March 27–29, Kyoto, Japan, pp. 9–12.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 143
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Chazan, S. E., Hammer, H., Hazan, G., Goldberger, J., and Gannot, S. (2019).
“Multi-microphone speaker separation based on deep DoA estimation,” in
Proceedings of EUSIPCO, September 2–6, A Coru~na, Spain.
Chiariotti, P., Martarelli, M., and Castellini, P. ( 2019). “Acoustic beam-
forming for noise source localization – Reviews, methodology and
applications,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 120, 422–448.
Cho, K., van Merrienboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F.,
Schwenk, H., and Bengio, Y. ( 2014). “Learning phrase representations
using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation,”
arXiv:1406.1078.
Choi, J., and Chang, J.-H. ( 2020). “Convolutional neural network-based
DoA estimation using stereo microphones for drone,” in Proceedings of
the ICEIC, January 19–22, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 1–5.
Chollet, F. ( 2017). Deep Learning with Python (Simon and Schuster, New
York).
Chytas, S. P., and Potamianos, G. ( 2019). “Hierarchical detection of sound
events and their localization using convolutional neural networks with
adaptive thresholds,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation
of Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , October
25–26, New York, NY.
Ciaparrone, G., Luque S /C19anchez, F., Tabik, S., Troiano, L., Tagliaferri, R.,
and Herrera, F. ( 2020). “Deep learning in video multi-object tracking: A
survey,” Neurocomputing 381, 61–88.
Cobos, M., Antonacci, F., Alexandridis, A., Mouchtaris, A., and Lee, B.
(2017). “A survey of sound source localization methods in wireless acous-
tic sensor networks,” Wireless Comm. Mobile Comput. 2017, 1–24.
Cohen, I. ( 2004). “Relative transfer function identiﬁcation using speech sig-
nals,” IEEE Trans. Speech Audio Process. 12(5), 451–459.
Cohen, T., Weiler, M., Kicanaoglu, B., and Welling, M. ( 2019). “Gauge
equivariant convolutional networks and the icosahedral CNN,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , June
9–15, Long Beach, CA, pp. 1321–1330.
Comanducci, L., Borra, F., Bestagini, P., Antonacci, F., Tubaro, S., and
Sarti, A. ( 2020a). “Source localization using distributed microphones in
reverberant environments based on deep learning and ray space trans-
form,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 28, 2238–2251.
Comanducci, L., Cobos, M., Antonacci, F., and Sarti, A. ( 2020b). “Time
difference of arrival estimation from frequency-sliding generalized cross-
correlations using convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the
ICASSP, May 4–8, Barcelona, Spain (virtual conference), pp. 4945–4949.
Comminiello, D., Lella, M., Scardapane, S., and Uncini, A. ( 2019).
“Quaternion convolutional neural networks for detection and localization
of 3D sound events,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , May
12–17, Brighton, UK.
Crawford, E., and Pineau, J. ( 2020). “Exploiting spatial invariance for scal-
able unsupervised object tracking,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, February 7–12, New York, NY.
Cristoforetti, L., Ravanelli, M., Omologo, M., Sosi, A., and Abad, A.
(2014). “The DIRHA simulated corpus,” in Proceedings of the LREC ,
May 26–31, Reykjavik, Iceland, pp. 2629–2634.
Daniel, J., and Kitic´, S. ( 2020). “Time-domain velocity vector for retracing
the multipath propagation,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , May 4–8,
Barcelona, Spain (virtual conference), pp. 421–425.
Datum, M. S., Palmieri, F., and Moiseff, A. ( 1996). “An artiﬁcial neural
network for sound localization using binaural cues,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
100(1), 372–383.
de Bree, H.-E. ( 2003). “An overview of microﬂown technologies,” Acta
Acust. united Ac. 89(1), 163–172.
DCASE Community ( 2022). “The DCASE Workshop and Challenge
website,” available at https://dcase.community/ (Last viewed June 27,
2022).
Deleforge, A., Forbes, F., and Horaud, R. ( 2013). “Variational EM for bin-
aural sound-source separation and localization,” in Proceedings of the
ICASSP, May 26–31, Vancouver, Canada.
Deleforge, A., and Horaud, R. ( 2012). “2D sound-source localization on the
binaural manifold,” in Proceedings of the MLSP , September 23–26,
Santander, Spain, pp. 1–6.
Deleforge, A., Horaud, R., Schechner, Y. Y., and Girin, L. ( 2015). “Co-
localization of audio sources in images using binaural features and
locally-linear regression,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang.
Process. 23(4), 718–731.
Diaz-Guerra, D., Miguel, A., and Beltran, J. R. ( 2021a). “gpuRIR: A python
library for room impulse response simulation with GPU acceleration,”
Multimed. Tools Appl. 80(4), 5653–5671.
Diaz-Guerra, D., Miguel, A., and Beltran, J. R. ( 2021b). “Robust sound
source tracking using SRP-PHAT and 3D convolutional neural networks,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 29, 300–311.
DiBiase, J. H., Silverman, H. F., and Brandstein, M. S. ( 2001). “Robust
localization in reverberant rooms,” in Microphone Arrays: Signal
Processing Techniques and Applications, edited by M. Brandstein and D.
Ward (Springer, Berlin), pp. 157–180.
Dmochowski, J. P., Benesty, J., and Affes, S. ( 2007). “Broadband MUSIC:
Opportunities and challenges for multiple source localization,” in
Proceedings of WASPAA, October 21–24, New Paltz, NY, pp. 18–21.
Dorfan, Y., and Gannot, S. ( 2015). “Tree-based recursive expectation-
maximization algorithm for localization of acoustic sources,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 23(10), 1692–1703.
Duong, N. Q., Vincent, E., and Gribonval, R. ( 2010). “Under-determined
reverberant audio source separation using a full-rank spatial covariance
model,” IEEE Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 18(7), 1830–1840.
Dvorkind, T. G., and Gannot, S. ( 2005). “Time difference of arrival estima-
tion of speech source in a noisy and reverberant environment,” Signal
Process 85(1), 177–204.
Eaton, J., Gaubitch, N. D., Moore, A. H., and Naylor, P. A. ( 2015). “The
ACE challenge “Corpus description and performance evaluation,” in
Proceedings of WASPAA, October 18–21, New Paltz, NY, pp. 1–5.
Elbir, A. M. ( 2020). “DeepMUSIC: Multiple signal classiﬁcation via deep
learning,” IEEE Sens. Lett. 4(4), 1–4.
El Zooghby, A., Christodoulou, C., and Georgiopoulos, M. ( 2000). “A neu-
ral network-based smart antenna for multiple source tracking,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propagat. 48(5), 768–776.
Emmanuel, P., Parrish, N., and Horton, M. ( 2021). “Multi-scale network for
sound event localization and detection,” Technical Report, DCASE 2021
Challenge.
Engel, J., Hantrakul, L., Gu, C., and Roberts, A. ( 2020). “DDSP:
Differentiable digital signal processing,” arXiv:2001.04643.
Erdogan, H., Hershey, J. R., Watanabe, S., Mandel, M., and Le Roux, J.
(2016). “Improved MVDR beamforming using single-channel mask pre-
diction networks,” in Proceedings of Interspeech , September 8–12, San
Francisco, CA.
Escolano, J., Xiang, N., Perez-Lorenzo, J. M., Cobos, M., and Lopez, J. J.
(2014). “A Bayesian direction-of-arrival model for an undetermined num-
ber of sources using a two-microphone array,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
135(2), 742–753.
Evers, C., L €ollmann, H. W., Mellmann, H., Schmidt, A., Barfuss, H.,
Naylor, P. A., and Kellermann, W. ( 2020). “The LOCATA challenge:
Acoustic source localization and tracking,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio.
Speech. Lang. Process. 28, 1620–1643.
Evers, C., Moore, A. H., and Naylor, P. A. ( 2014). “Multiple source local-
isation in the spherical harmonic domain,” in Proceedings of IWAENC ,
September 8–11, Antibes, France, pp. 258–262.
Fahim, A., Samarasinghe, P. N., and Abhayapala, T. D. ( 2020). “Multi-
source DoA estimation through pattern recognition of the modal coher-
ence of a reverberant soundﬁeld,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech.
Lang. Process. 28, 605–618.
Falong, L., Hongbing, J., and Xiaopeng, Z. ( 1993). “The ML bearing esti-
mation by using neural networks,” J. Electron. (China) 10(1), 1–8.
Fernandez-Grande, E., Bianco, M. J., Gannot, S., and Gerstoft, P. ( 2021).
“DTU three-channel room impulse response dataset for direction of
arrival estimation 2020,” available at https://ieee-dataport.org/open-
access/dtu-three-channel-room-impulse-response-dataset-direction-arrival-
estimation-2020 (Last viewed June 27, 2022).
Fortunati, S., Grasso, R., Gini, F., Greco, M. S., and LePage, K. ( 2014).
“Single-snapshot DOA estimation by using compressed sensing,”
EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process. 2014(1), 1–17.
Foucart, S., and Rauhut, H. ( 2013). “An invitation to compressive sensing,”
in A Mathematical Introduction to Compressive Sensing (Springer, New
York), pp. 1–39.
Francombe, J. ( 2017). IoSR Listening Room Multichannel BRIR Dataset
(University of Surrey, Surrey, UK).
Gannot, S., Haardt, M., Kellermann, W., and Willett, P. ( 2019).
“Introduction to the issue on acoustic source localization and tracking in
dynamic real-life scenes,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 13(1), 3–7.
144 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Gannot, S., Vincent, E., Markovich-Golan, S., and Ozerov, A. ( 2017). “A
consolidated perspective on multimicrophone speech enhancement and
source separation,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process.
25(4), 692–730.
Garofolo, J., Graff, D., Paul, D., and Pallett, D. ( 1993a). “CSR-I (WSJ0)
Sennheiser LDC93S6B,” Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, PA,
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC93S6B (Last viewed June 27, 2022).
Garofolo, J. S., Lamel, L., Fisher, W. M., Fiscus, J. G., Pallett, D. S.,
Dahlgren, N. L., and Zue, V. ( 1993b). “TIMIT Acoustic-Phonetic
Continuous Speech Corpus,” Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia,
PA, https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC93s1 (Last viewed June 27, 2022).
Gelderblom, F. B., Liu, Y., Kvam, J., and Myrvoll, T. A. ( 2021). “Synthetic
data for DNN-based DoA estimation of indoor speech,” in Proceedings of
the ICASSP, June 6–11, Toronto, Canada (virtual conference).
Gerstoft, P., Mecklenbr €auker, C. F., Seong, W., and Bianco, M. ( 2018).
“Introduction to compressive sensing in acoustics,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
143(6), 3731–3736.
Gerstoft, P., Mecklenbr €auker, C. F., Xenaki, A., and Nannuru, S. ( 2016).
“Multisnapshot sparse Bayesian learning for DOA,” IEEE Signal Process.
Lett. 23(10), 1469–1473.
Gerzon, M. A. ( 1992). “General metatheory of auditory localisation,” in
Proceedings of the Audio Engineering Society (AES) Convention , March
24–27, Vienna, Austria.
Girin, L., Leglaive, S., Bie, X., Diard, J., Hueber, T., and Alameda-Pineda,
X. ( 2021). “Dynamical variational autoencoders: A comprehensive
review,” FNT Mach. Learn. 15(1–2), 1–175.
Gonc¸alves Pinto, W., Bauerheim, M., and Parisot-Dupuis, H. ( 2021).
“Deconvoluting acoustic beamforming maps with a deep neural network,”
in Proceedings of the Inter-Noise Conference , August 1–4, Washington,
DC, pp. 5397–5408.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. ( 2016). Deep Learning (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA).
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D.,
Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. ( 2014). “Generative Adversarial
Nets,” in Proceedings of NIPS, December 8–13, Montr/C19eal, Canada.
Goryn, D., and Kaveh, M. ( 1988). “Neural networks for narrowband and
wideband direction ﬁnding,” in Proceedings of ICASSP , April 11–14,
New-York, NY, pp. 2164–2167.
Grondin, F., Sobieraj, I., Plumbley, M., and Glass, J. ( 2019). “Sound event
localization and detection using CRNN on pairs of microphones,” in
Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and
Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , October 25–26, New York, pp.
84–88.
Grumiaux, P.-A., Kitic, S., Girin, L., and Guerin, A. ( 2020). “High-resolu-
tion speaker counting in reverberant rooms using CRNN with Ambisonics
features,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , January 18–22, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands (virtual conference).
Grumiaux, P.-A., Kitic, S., Girin, L., and Gu /C19erin, A. ( 2021a). “Improved
feature extraction for CRNN-based multiple sound source localization,”
in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August 23–27, Dublin, Ireland (virtual
conference).
Grumiaux, P.-A., Kitic, S., Srivastava, P., Girin, L., and Gu /C19erin, A.
(2021b). “SALADnet: Self-attentive multisource localization in the
Ambisonics domain,” in Proceedings of WASPAA , October 17–20, New
Paltz, NY (virtual conference).
Guirguis, K., Schorn, C., Guntoro, A., Abdulatif, S., and Yang, B. ( 2020).
“SELD-TCN: Sound event localization & detection via temporal convolu-
tional networks,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , January 18–22,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands (virtual conference).
Guizzo, E., Gramaccioni, R. F., Jamili, S., Marinoni, C., Massaro, E.,
Medaglia, C., Nachira, G., Nucciarelli, L., Paglialunga, L., Pennese, M.,
Pepe, S., Rocchi, E., Uncini, A., and Comminiello, D., “L3DAS21
Challenge: Machine learning for 3D audio signal processing,” in IEEE
International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing
(MLSP), October 2021, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia, pp. 1–6.
Gulati, A., Qin, J., Chiu, C.-C., Parmar, N., Zhang, Y., Yu, J., Han, W.,
Wang, S., Zhang, Z., Wu, Y., and Pang, R. ( 2020). “Conformer:
Convolution-augmented Transformer for speech recognition,” in
Proceedings of Interspeech, October 25–29, Shanghai, China (virtual con-
ference), pp. 5036–5040.
Habets, E. A. P. ( 2006). “Room impulse response generator,” Technical
Report.
Habets, E. A. P. ( 2022). “Signal generator” https://github.com/ehabets/
Signal-Generator/ (Last viewed March 31, 2022).
Hadad, E., Heese, F., Vary, P., and Gannot, S. ( 2014). “Multichannel audio
database in various acoustic environments,” in Proceedings of IWAENC ,
September 8–11, Antibes, France, pp. 313–317.
Hahmann, M., Verburg, S., and Fernandez-Grande, E. (2021a). “Acoustic fre-
quency responses of an empty cuboid room,” https://data.dtu.dk/articles/data
set/Acoustic_frequency_responses_of_an_empty_cuboid_room/13315289
(Last viewed June 27, 2022).
Hahmann, M., Verburg, S. A., and Fernandez-Grande, E. ( 2021b). “Spatial
reconstruction of sound ﬁelds using local and data-driven functions,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 150(6), 4417–4428.
Hammer, H., Chazan, S. E., Goldberger, J., and Gannot, S. ( 2021).
“Dynamically localizing multiple speakers based on the time-frequency
domain,” EURASIP J. Audio Speech Music Process. 2021(1), 1–10.
Hao, Y., K €uc¸ €uk, A., Ganguly, A., and Panahi, I. M. S. ( 2020). “Spectral
ﬂux-based convolutional neural network architecture for speech source
localization and its real-time implementation,” IEEE Access 8,
197047–197058.
H€ubner, F., Mack, W., and Habets, E. A. P. ( 2021). “Efﬁcient training data
generation for phase-based DoA estimation,” in Proceedings of the
ICASSP, June 6–11, Toronto, Canada (virtual conference).
He, W., Motlicek, P., and Odobez, J.-M. ( 2018a). “Deep neural networks
for multiple speaker detection and localization,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE ICRA, May 21–25, Brisbane, Australia, pp. 74–79.
He, W., Motlicek, P., and Odobez, J.-M. ( 2018b). “Joint localization and
classiﬁcation of multiple sound sources using a multi-task neural
network,” in Proceedings of Interspeech , September 2–6, Hyderabad,
India, pp. 312–316.
He, W., Motlicek, P., and Odobez, J.-M. ( 2019a). “Adaptation of multiple
sound source localization neural networks with weak supervision and
domain-adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , May 12–17,
Brighton, UK, pp. 770–774.
He, W., Motlicek, P., and Odobez, J.-M. (2021a). “Neural network adaptation
and data augmentation for multi-speaker direction-of-arrival estimation,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process.29, 1303–1317.
He, Y., Trigoni, N., and Markham, A. ( 2021b). “SoundDet: Polyphonic
moving sound event detection and localization from raw waveform,” in
Proceedings of the ICML, July 18–24, Virtual Conference.
He, Z., Li, J., Liu, D., He, H., and Barber, D. ( 2019b). “Tracking by anima-
tion: Unsupervised learning of multi-object attentive trackers,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE CVPR , June 16–20, Long Beach, CA, pp.
1318–1327.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. ( 2016). “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proceedings of CVPR, June 26–July 1, Las Vegas,
NV, pp. 770–778.
Heymann, J., Drude, L., Boeddeker, C., Hanebrink, P., and Haeb-Umbach,
R. ( 2017). “Beamnet: End-to-end training of a beamformer-supported
multi-channel ASR system,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , March 5–9,
New Orleans, LA.
Heymann, J., Drude, L., and Haeb-Umbach, R. ( 2016). “Neural network
based spectral mask estimation for acoustic beamforming,” in
Proceedings of the ICASSP, March 20–25, Shanghai, China.
Hickling, R., Wei, W., and Raspet, R. ( 1993). “Finding the direction of a
sound source using a vector sound-intensity probe,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
94(4), 2408–2412.
Higuchi, T., Kinoshita, K., Delcroix, M., Zmolkova, K., and Nakatani, T.
(2017). “Deep clustering-based beamforming for separation with
unknown number of sources,” in Proceedings of Interspeech , August
20–24, Stockholm, Sweden.
Hirvonen, T. ( 2015). “Classiﬁcation of spatial audio location and content
using convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the AES
Convention, May 7–10, Warsaw, Poland.
Hochreiter, S., and Schmidhuber, J. ( 1997). “Long short-term memory,”
Neural Comput. 9(8), 1735–1780.
Hogg, A. O., Neo, V. W., Weiss, S., Evers, C., and Naylor, P. A. ( 2021). “A
polynomial eigenvalue decomposition MUSIC approach for broadband
sound source localization,” in Proceedings of WASPAA , October 21–24,
New Paltz, NY.
Hu, J., Shen, L., Albanie, S., Sun, G., and Wu, E. ( 2020). “Squeeze-and-
excitation networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 42(8),
2011–2023.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 145
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Huang, D., and Perez, R. ( 2021). “SSELDNET: A fully end-to-end sample-
level framework for sound event localization and detection,” Technical
Report, DCASE 2021 Challenge.
Huang, Y., Wu, X., and Qu, T. ( 2018). “DNN-based sound source localiza-
tion method with microphone array,” in Proceedings of the IECE ,
October 28–29, Beijing, China.
Huang, Y., Wu, X., and Qu, T. ( 2019). “A time-domain end-to-end method
for sound source localization using multi-task learning,” in Proceedings
of the ICSP, September 28–30, Weihai, China, pp. 52–56.
Huang, Y., Wu, X., and Qu, T. ( 2020). “A time-domain unsupervised learn-
ing based sound source localization method,” in Proceedings of the ICSP,
September 12–15, Shanghai, China, pp. 26–32.
Jacobsen, F., and Juhl, P. M. ( 2013). Fundamentals of General Linear
Acoustics (John Wiley & Sons, New York).
Jarrett, D. P., Habets, E. A., and Naylor, P. A. ( 2010). “3D source localiza-
tion in the spherical harmonic domain using a pseudointensity vector,” in
Proceedings of EUSIPCO , August 23–27, Aalborg, Denmark, pp.
442–446.
Jarrett, D. P., Habets, E. A., and Naylor, P. A. ( 2017). Theory and
Applications of Spherical Microphone Array Processing (Springer, New
York).
Jarrett, D., Habets, E., Thomas, M., and Naylor, P. ( 2012). “Rigid sphere
room impulse response simulation: Algorithm and applications,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 132(3), 1462–1472.
Jenrungrot, T., Jayaram, V., Seitz, S., and Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, I.
(2020). “The cone of silence: Speech separation by localization,”
arXiv:2010.06007.
Jha, S., Chapman, R., and Durrani, T. ( 1988). “Bearing estimation using
neural networks,” in Proceedings of ICASSP , April 11–14, New York,
NY, pp. 2156–2159.
Jha, S., and Durrani, T. ( 1989). “Bearing estimation using neural optimisa-
tion methods,” in Proceedings of IEE International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, October 16–18, London, UK, pp. 129–133.
Jha, S., and Durrani, T. ( 1991). “Direction of arrival estimation using artiﬁ-
cial neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst, Man, Cybernet. 21(5),
1192–1201.
Kapka, S., and Lewandowski, M. ( 2019). “Sound source detection, localiza-
tion and classiﬁcation using consecutive ensemble of CRNN models,” in
Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and
Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop), October 25–26, New York, NY.
Karthik, S., Prabhu, A., and Gandhi, V. ( 2020). “Simple unsupervised
multi-object tracking,” arXiv:2006.02609.
Kim, J., and Hahn, M. ( 2018). “Voice activity detection using an adaptive
context attention model,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 25(8), 1181–1185.
Kim, Y. ( 2014). “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classi-
ﬁcation,” arXiv:1408.5882.
Kim, Y., and Ling, H. ( 2011). “Direction of arrival estimation of humans
with a small sensor array using an artiﬁcial neural network,” PIER. B 27,
127–149.
Kingma, D. P., and Welling, M. ( 2014). “Auto-encoding variational
Bayes,” in Proceedings of the ICLR, April 14–16, Banff, Canada.
Kitic´, S., Bertin, N., and Gribonval, R. ( 2014). “Hearing behind walls:
Localizing sources in the room next door with cosparsity,” in
Proceedings of the ICASSP, May 4–9, Florence, Italy, pp. 3087–3091.
Kitic´, S., and Gu /C19erin, A. ( 2018). “TRAMP: Tracking by a Real-time
AMbisonic-based Particle ﬁlter,” in IEEE-AASP Challenge on Acoustic
Source Localization and Tracking (LOCATA), July 8–11, Shefﬁeld, UK.
Knapp, C., and Carter, G. ( 1976). “The generalized correlation method for
estimation of time delay,” IEEE Trans. Acoust, Speech, Signal Process.
24(4), 320–327.
Komatsu, T., Togami, M., and Takahashi, T. ( 2020). “Sound event localiza-
tion and detection using convolutional recurrent neural networks and
gated linear units,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August 24–28,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands (virtual conference), pp. 41–45.
Kong, Q., Cao, Y., Iqbal, T., Wang, W., and Plumbley, M. D. ( 2019).
“Cross-task learning for audio tagging, sound event detection and spatial
localization,” Technical Report, DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Kounades-Bastian, D., Girin, L., Alameda-Pineda, X., Gannot, S., and
Horaud, R. ( 2017). “An EM algorithm for joint source separation and
diarisation of multichannel convolutive speech mixtures,” in Proceedings
of the ICASSP, March 5–9, New Orleans, LA, pp. 16–20.
Kouw, W. M., and Loog, M. ( 2019). “A review of domain adaptation with-
out target labels,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 43(3),
766–785.
Koyama, S., Nishida, T., Kimura, K., Abe, T., Ueno, N., and Brunnstr €om, J.
(2021). “MeshRIR: A dataset of room impulse responses on meshed grid
points for evaluating sound ﬁeld analysis and synthesis methods,” in
Proceedings of WASPAA, October 21–24, New Paltz, NY (virtual confer-
ence), pp. 1–5.
Krause, D., and Kowalczyk, K. ( 2019). “Arborescent neural network archi-
tectures for sound event detection and localization,” Technical Report,
DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Krause, D., Politis, A., and Kowalczyk, K. ( 2020a). “Comparison of convo-
lution types in CNN-based feature extraction for sound source local-
ization,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August 24–28, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands (virtual conference), pp. 820–824.
Krause, D., Politis, A., and Kowalczyk, K. ( 2020b). “Feature overview for
joint modeling of sound event detection and localization using a micro-
phone array,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August 24–28,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands (virtual conference), pp. 31–35.
Krause, D., Politis, A., and Kowalczyk, K. ( 2021). “Data diversity for
improving DNN-based localization of concurrent sound events,” in
Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August 23–27, Dublin, Ireland (virtual
conference), pp. 236–240.
Kristoffersen, M. S., Møller, M. B., Mart /C19 ınez-Nuevo, P., and Østergaard, J.
(2021). “Deep sound ﬁeld reconstruction in real rooms: Introducing the
ISOBEL sound ﬁeld dataset,” arXiv:2102.06455.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. ( 2017). “ImageNet classiﬁ-
cation with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM 60(6),
84–90.
K€uc¸ €uk, A., Ganguly, A., Hao, Y., and Panahi, I. M. S. ( 2019). “Real-time
convolutional neural network-based speech source localization on
smartphone,” IEEE Access 7, 169969–169978.
Kujawski, A., Herold, G., and Sarradj, E. ( 2019). “A deep learning method
for grid-free localization and quantiﬁcation of sound sources,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 146(3), EL225–EL231.
Kuttruff, H. (2016). Room Acoustics (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL).
Lamel, L., Gauvain, J.-L., and Eskenazi, M. ( 1991). “BREF, a large vocab-
ulary spoken corpus for French,” in Proceedings of Eurospeech ,
September 24–26, Genova, Italy, pp. 4–7.
Landschoot, C. R., and Xiang, N. ( 2019). “Model-based Bayesian direction
of arrival analysis for sound sources using a spherical microphone array,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am 146(6), 4936–4946.
Lathoud, G., Odobez, J.-M., and Gatica-Perez, D. ( 2004). “AV16.3: An
audio-visual corpus for speaker localization and tracking,” in Proceedings
of the International MLMI , June 21–23, Martigny, Switzerland, pp.
182–195.
Laufer-Goldshtein, B., Talmon, R., and Gannot, S. ( 2020). “Data-driven
multi-microphone speaker localization on manifolds,” FNT Signal
Process. 14(1–2), 1–161.
Lea, C., Flynn, M. D., Vidal, R., Reiter, A., and Hager, G. D. ( 2017).
“Temporal convolutional networks for action segmentation and
detection,” in Proceedings of the CVPR , July 21–26, Honolulu, HI, pp.
1003–1012.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. ( 2015). “Deep learning,” Nature
521(7553), 436–444.
Lee, H., Cho, J., Kim, M., and Park, H. ( 2016). “DNN-based feature
enhancement using DoA-constrained ICA for robust speech recognition,”
IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 23(8), 1091–1095.
Lee, J., Park, J., Kim, K. L., and Nam, J. ( 2017). “Sample-level deep convo-
lutional neural networks for music auto-tagging using raw waveforms,”
arXiv:1703.01789.
Lee, S.-H., Hwang, J.-W., Seo, S.-B., and Park, H.-M. ( 2021b). “Sound
event localization and detection using cross-modal attention and parame-
ter sharing for DCASE2021 challenge,” Technical Report, DCASE 2021
Challenge.
Lee, S. Y., Chang, J., and Lee, S. ( 2021a). “Deep learning-based method
for multiple sound source localization with high resolution and accuracy,”
Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 161, 107959.
Leglaive, S., Girin, L., and Horaud, R. ( 2019). “Semi-supervised multichan-
nel speech enhancement with variational autoencoders and non-negative
matrix factorization,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , May 12–17,
Brighton, UK, pp. 101–105.
146 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Lehmann, E. A., and Johansson, A. M. ( 2010). “Diffuse reverberation
model for efﬁcient image-source simulation of room impulse responses,”
IEEE Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 18(6), 1429–1439.
Le Moing, G., Vinayavekhin, P., Agravante, D. J., Inoue, T.,
Vongkulbhisal, J., Munawar, A., and Tachibana, R. ( 2021). “Data-efﬁ-
cient framework for real-world multiple sound source 2D localization,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process. (ICASSP) ,
Toronto, Canada (virtual conference).
Le Moing, G., Vinayavekhin, P., Inoue, T., Vongkulbhisal, J., Munawar,
A., Tachibana, R., and Agravante, D. J. ( 2020). “Learning multiple sound
source 2D localization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE MMSP , September
21–24, Tampere, Finland (virtual conference).
Leung, S., and Ren, Y. ( 2019). “Spectrum combination and convolutional
recurrent neural networks for joint localization and detection of sound
events,” Technical Report, DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Li, B., Sainath, T. N., Weiss, R. J., Wilson, K. W., and Bacchiani, M.
(2016d). “Neural network adaptive beamforming for robust multichannel
speech recognition,” in Proceedings of Interspeech, September 8–12, San
Francisco, CA.
Li, Q., Zhang, X., and Li, H. ( 2018). “Online direction of arrival estimation
based on deep learning,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , April 15–20,
Calgary, Canada, pp. 2616–2620.
Li, X., Girin, L., Badeig, F., and Horaud, R. ( 2016a). “Reverberant sound
localization with a robot head based on direct-path relative transfer
function,” in Proceedings of the IROS, October 9–14, Daejeon, Korea, pp.
2819–2826.
Li, X., Girin, L., Horaud, R., and Gannot, S. ( 2015). “Estimation of relative
transfer function in the presence of stationary noise based on segmental
power spectral density matrix subtraction,” in Proceedings of the
ICASSP, April 19–24, Brisbane, Australia, pp. 320–324.
Li, X., Girin, L., Horaud, R., and Gannot, S. ( 2016b). “Estimation of the
direct-path relative transfer function for supervised sound source local-
ization,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 24(11),
2171–2186.
Li, X., Girin, L., Horaud, R., and Gannot, S. ( 2017). “Multiple-speaker
localization based on direct-path features and likelihood maximization
with spatial sparsity regularization,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech.
Lang. Process. 25(10), 1197–2012.
Li, X., Horaud, R., Girin, L., and Gannot, S. (2016c). “Voice activity detection
based on statistical likelihood ratio with adaptive thresholding,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE IWAENC, September 13–16, Xi’an, China, pp. 1–5.
Liang, Y., and Zhou, Y. ( 2018). “LSTM multiple object tracker combining
multiple cues,” in Proceedings of the IEEE ICIP , February 7–14, Athens,
Greece, pp. 2351–2355.
Lin, X., Girin, L., and Alameda-Pineda, X. ( 2022). “Unsupervised multiple-
object tracking with a dynamical variational autoencoder,”
arXiv:2202.09315.
Lin, Y., and Wang, Z. ( 2019). “A report on sound event localization and
detection,” Technical Report, DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Liu, N., Chen, H., Songgong, K., and Li, Y. ( 2021). “Deep learning assisted
sound source localization using two orthogonal ﬁrst-order differential
microphone arrays,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 149(2), 1069–1084.
Liu, Z.-M., Huang, Z.-T., and Zhou, Y.-Y. ( 2012). “An efﬁcient maximum
likelihood method for direction-of-arrival estimation via sparse Bayesian
learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 11(10), 1–11.
Liu, Z.-M., Zhang, C., and Yu, P. S. ( 2018). “Direction-of-arrival estima-
tion based on deep neural networks with robustness to array
imperfections,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. 66(12), 7315–7327.
Lu, Z. ( 2019). “Sound event detection and localization based on CNN and
LSTM,” Technical Report, DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Luiten, J., Zulﬁkar, I. E., and Leibe, B. ( 2020). “UnOVOST: Unsupervised
ofﬂine video object segmentation and tracking,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE WACV, March 1–5, Snowmass Village, CO, pp. 1989–1998.
Luo, W., Xing, J., Milan, A., Zhang, X., Liu, W., and Kim, T.-K. ( 2021).
“Multiple object tracking: A literature review,” Artif. Intell. 293, 103448.
Luo, Y., Chen, Z., Mesgarani, N., and Yoshioka, T. ( 2020). “End-to-end
microphone permutation and number invariant multi-channel speech sep-
aration,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP 2020, May 4–8, Barcelona, Spain,
pp. 6394–6398.
Luo, Y., and Mesgarani, N. ( 2019). “Conv-TASnet: Surpassing ideal time–-
frequency magnitude masking for speech separation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 27(8), 1256–1266.
Ma, N., Brown, G., and May, T. ( 2015). “Exploiting deep neural networks
and head movements for binaural localisation of multiple speakers in
reverberant conditions,” in Proceedings of Interspeech , September 6–10,
Dresden, Germany, pp. 160–164.
Ma, W., and Liu, X. ( 2018). “Phased microphone array for sound source
localization with deep learning,” Aerosp. Syst. 2(2), 71–81.
Mabande, E., Sun, H., Kowalczyk, K., and Kellermann, W. ( 2011).
“Comparison of subspace-based and steered beamformer-based reﬂection
localization methods,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August
29–September 2, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 146–150.
Mack, W., Bharadwaj, U., Chakrabarty, S., and Habets, E. A. P. ( 2020).
“Signal-aware broadband DoA estimation using attention mechanisms,”
in Proceedings of the ICASSP 2020 , May 4–8, Barcelona, Spain, pp.
4930–4934.
Mandel, M. I., Weiss, R. J., and Ellis, D. P. ( 2009). “Model-based
expectation-maximization source separation and localization,” IEEE
Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 18(2), 382–394.
Markovich-Golan, S., and Gannot, S. ( 2015). “Performance analysis of the
covariance subtraction method for relative transfer function estimation
and comparison to the covariance whitening method,” in Proceedings of
the ICASSP, April 19–24, Brisbane, Australia.
Maruri, H. A. C., Meyer, P. L., Huang, J., Ontiveros, JAdH., and Lu, H.
(2019). “GCC-PHAT cross-correlation audio features for simultaneous
sound event localization and detection (SELD) in multiple rooms,”
Technical Report, DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Masuyama, Y., Bando, Y., Yatabe, K., Sasaki, Y., Onishi, M., and Oikawa,
Y. (2020). “Self-supervised neural audio-visual sound source localization
via probabilistic spatial modeling,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ
IROS, October 25–29, Las Vegas, NV, pp. 4848–4854.
May, T., Van De Par, S., and Kohlrausch, A. ( 2011). “A probabilistic model
for robust localization based on a binaural auditory front-end,” IEEE
Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 19(1), 1–13.
Maysenh€older, W. ( 1993). “The reactive intensity of general time-harmonic
structure-borne sound ﬁelds,” in Proceedings of the International
Congress on Intensity Techniques , August 31–September 2, Leuven,
Belgium, pp. 63–70.
Mazzon, L., Koizumi, Y., Yasuda, M., and Harada, N. ( 2019). “First order
Ambisonics domain spatial augmentation for DNN-based direction of
arrival estimation,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of
Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , October
25–26, New York.
Meinhardt, T., Kirillov, A., Leal-Taixe, L., and Feichtenhofer, C. ( 2021).
“Trackformer: Multi-object tracking with transformers,”
arXiv:2101.02702.
Meng, Z., Watanabe, S., Hershey, J. R., and Erdogan, H. ( 2017). “Deep
long short-term memory adaptive beamforming networks for multichan-
nel robust speech recognition,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , March
5–9, New Orleans, LA.
Merimaa, J. ( 2006). “Analysis, synthesis, and perception of spatial sound:
Binaural localization modeling and multichannel loudspeaker
reproduction,” Ph.D. thesis, Helsinki University of Technology, Helsinki,
Finland.
Nam, S., Davies, M. E., Elad, M., and Gribonval, R. ( 2013). “The cosparse
analysis model and algorithms,” Appl. Comput. Harmonic Anal. 34(1),
30–56.
Nannuru, S., Koochakzadeh, A., Gemba, K. L., Pal, P., and Gerstoft, P.
(2018). “Sparse Bayesian learning for beamforming using sparse linear
arrays,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 144(5), 2719–2729.
Naranjo-Alcazar, J., Perez-Castanos, S., Cobos, M., Ferri, F. J., and
Zuccarello, P. ( 2021). “Sound event localisation and detection using
squeeze-excitation residual CNNs,” Technical Report, DCASE 2021
Challenge.
Naranjo-Alcazar, J., Perez-Castanos, S., Ferrandis, J., Zuccarello, P., and
Cobos, M. (2020). “Sound event localization and detection using squeeze-
excitation residual CNNs,” Technical Report, DCASE 2020 Challenge.
Nehorai, A., and Paldi, E. ( 1994). “Acoustic vector-sensor array pro-
cessing,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 42(9), 2481–2491.
Nguyen, Q., Girin, L., Bailly, G., Elisei, F., and Nguyen, D.-C. ( 2018).
“Autonomous sensorimotor learning for sound source localization by a
humanoid robot,” in IEEE/RSJ IROS, October 1–5, Madrid, Spain.
Nguyen, T. N. T., Gan, W.-S., Ranjan, R., and Jones, D. L. ( 2020a).
“Robust source counting and DoA estimation using spatial pseudo-
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 147
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


spectrum and convolutional neural network,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio.
Speech. Lang. Process. 28, 2626–2637.
Nguyen, T. N. T., Jones, D. L., and Gan, W. S. ( 2020b). “Ensemble of
sequence matching networks for dynamic sound event localization, detec-
tion, and tracking,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of
Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , November
2–4, Tokyo, Japan.
Nguyen, T. N. T., Jones, D. L., and Gan, W.-S. ( 2020c). “A sequence
matching network for polyphonic sound event localization and detection,”
in Proceedings of the ICASSP 2020 , May 4–8, Barcelona, Spain (virtual
conference), pp. 71–75.
Nguyen, T. N. T., Nguyen, N. K., Phan, H., Pham, L., Ooi, K., Jones, D. L.,
and Gan, W.-S. ( 2021a). “A general network architecture for sound event
localization and detection using transfer learning and recurrent neural
network,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , June 6–11, Toronto, Canada
(virtual conference), pp. 935–939.
Nguyen, T. N. T., Watcharasupat, K., Nguyen, N. K., Jones, D. L., and
Gan, W. S. ( 2021b). “DCASE 2021 Task 3: Spectrotemporally-aligned
features for polyphonic sound event localization and detection,”
Technical Report, DCASE 2021 Challenge.
Noh, K., Choi, J.-H., Jeon, D., and Chang, J.-H. ( 2019). “Three-stage
approach for sound event localization and detection,” Technical Report,
DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Nolan, M., Verburg, S. A., Brunskog, J., and Fernandez-Grande, E. ( 2019).
“Experimental characterization of the sound ﬁeld in a reverberation
room,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 145(4), 2237–2246.
Noohi, T., Epain, N., and Jin, C. T. ( 2013). “Direction of arrival estimation
for spherical microphone arrays by combination of independent compo-
nent analysis and sparse recovery,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , May
26–31, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 346–349.
Nugraha, A. A., Liutkus, A., and Vincent, E. ( 2016). “Multichannel audio
source separation with deep neural networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio.
Speech. Lang. Process. 24(9), 1652–1664.
Nustede, E. J., and Anem€uller, J. (2019). “Group delay features for sound event
detection and localization,” Technical Report, DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Opochinsky, R., Chechik, G., and Gannot, S. ( 2021). “Deep ranking-based
DoA tracking algorithm,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August
23–27, Dublin, Ireland (virtual conference), pp. 1020–1024.
Opochinsky, R., Laufer-Goldshtein, B., Gannot, S., and Chechik, G. ( 2019).
“Deep ranking-based sound source localization,” in Proceedings of
WASPAA, October 21–24, New Paltz, NY, pp. 283–287.
Pak, J., and Shin, J. W. ( 2019). “Sound localization based on phase differ-
ence enhancement using deep neural networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 27(8), 1335–1345.
Pal, P., and Vaidyanathan, P. P. ( 2010). “Nested arrays: A novel approach
to array processing with enhanced degrees of freedom,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process. 58(8), 4167–4181.
Pang, C., Liu, H., and Li, X. ( 2019). “Multitask learning of time-frequency
CNN for sound source localization,” IEEE Access 7, 40725–40737.
Parcollet, T., Zhang, Y., Morchid, M., Trabelsi, C., Linare `s, G., De Mori,
R., and Bengio, Y. ( 2018). “Quaternion Convolutional Neural Networks
for End-to-End Automatic Speech Recognition,” arXiv:1806.07789.
Park, D. S., Chan, W., Zhang, Y., Chiu, C.-C., Zoph, B., Cubuk, E. D., and
Le, Q. V. ( 2019a). “SpecAugment: A simple data augmentation method
for automatic speech recognition,” in Proceedings of Interspeech ,
September 15–19, Graz, Austria, pp. 2613–2617.
Park, S., Jeong, Y., and Lee, T. ( 2021a). “Many-to-many audio spectrogram
transformer: Transformer for sound event localization and detection,” in
Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and
Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , November 15–19, Barcelona,
Spain, pp. 105–109.
Park, S., Lim, W., Suh, S., and Jeong, Y. ( 2019b). “TrellisNet-based archi-
tecture for sound event localization and detection with reassembly
learning,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic
Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , October 25–26, New
York, NY.
Park, S., Suh, S., and Jeong, Y. ( 2020). “Sound event localization and
detection with various loss functions,” Technical Report, DCASE 2020
Challenge.
Park, T. J., Kanda, N., Dimitriadis, D., Han, K. J., Watanabe, S., and
Narayanan, S. ( 2021b). “A review of speaker diarization: Recent advan-
ces with deep learning,” arXiv:2101.09624.
Patel, S. J., Zawodniok, M., and Benesty, J. ( 2020). “A single stage fully
convolutional neural network for sound source localization and
detection,” Technical Report, DCASE 2020 Challenge.
Pavlidi, D., Delikaris-Manias, S., Pulkki, V., and Mouchtaris, A. ( 2015).
“3D localization of multiple sound sources with intensity vector estimates
in single source zones,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August
31–September 4, Nice, France, pp. 1556–1560.
Peeters, G. ( 2004). “A large set of audio features for sound description
(similarity and classiﬁcation) in the CUIDADO project,” CUIDADO
Project Report 54.0.
Perotin, L., D /C19efossez, A., Vincent, E., Serizel, R., and Gu /C19erin, A. ( 2019a).
“Regression versus classiﬁcation for neural network based audio source
localization,” in Proceedings of WASPAA , October 21–24, New Paltz,
NY.
Perotin, L., Serizel, R., Vincent, E., and Gu /C19erin, A. ( 2018a). “Multichannel
speech separation with recurrent neural networks from high-order ambi-
sonics recordings,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , April 15–20, Calgary,
Canada.
Perotin, L., Serizel, R., Vincent, E., and Gu /C19erin, A. ( 2018b). “CRNN-based
joint azimuth and elevation localization with the Ambisonics intensity
vector,” in Proceedings of the IWAENC, September 17–20, Tokyo, Japan,
pp. 241–245.
Perotin, L., Serizel, R., Vincent, E., and Gu /C19erin, A. ( 2019b). “CRNN-based
multiple DoA estimation using acoustic intensity features for Ambisonics
recordings,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 13(1), 22–33.
Pertil€a, P., and Cakir, E. ( 2017). “Robust direction estimation with convolu-
tional neural networks based steered response power,” in Proceedings of
the ICASSP, March 5–9, New Orleans, LA, pp. 6125–6129.
Phan, H., Pham, L., Koch, P., Duong, N. Q. K., McLoughlin, I.,
and Mertins, A. ( 2020a). “Audio event detection and localization with
multitask regression network,” Technical Report, DCASE 2020
Challenge.
Phan, H., Pham, L., Koch, P., Duong, N. Q. K., McLoughlin, I., and
Mertins, A. (2020b). “On multitask loss function for audio event detection
and localization,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of
Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , November
2–4, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 160–164.
Ping, G., Fernandez-Grande, E., Gerstoft, P., and Chu, Z. ( 2020). “Three-
dimensional source localization using sparse Bayesian learning on a
spherical microphone array,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 147(6), 3895–3904.
Politis, A., Adavanne, S., Krause, D., Deleforge, A., Srivastava, P., and
Virtanen, T. ( 2021). “A dataset of dynamic reverberant sound scenes with
directional interferers for sound event localization and detection,” in
Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and
Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , November 15–19, Barcelona,
Spain.
Politis, A., Adavanne, S., and Virtanen, T. ( 2020a). “A dataset of reverber-
ant spatial sound scenes with moving sources for sound event localization
and detection,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of
Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , November
2–4, Tokyo, pp. 165–169.
Politis, A., Mesaros, A., Adavanne, S., Heittola, T., and Virtanen, T.
(2020b). “Overview and evaluation of sound event localization and detec-
tion in DCASE 2019,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process.
29, 684–698.
Poschadel, N., Hupke, R., Preihs, S., and Peissig, J. ( 2021a). “Direction of
arrival estimation of noisy speech using convolutional recurrent neural
networks with higher-order Ambisonics signals,” in Proceedings of the
EUSIPCO, August 23–27, Dublin, Ireland (virtual conference).
Poschadel, N., Preihs, S., and Peissig, J. ( 2021b). “Multi-source direction of
arrival estimation of noisy speech using convolutional recurrent neural
networks with higher-order ambisonics signals,” in Proceedings of the
EUSIPCO, August 23–27, Dublin, Ireland (virtual conference), pp.
1015–1019.
Pratik, P., Jee, W. J., Nagisetty, S., Mars, R., and Lim, C. ( 2019). “Sound
event localization and detection using CRNN architecture with Mixup for
model generalization,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation
of Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , October
25–26, New York.
Pujol, H., Bavu, E., and Garcia, A. ( 2019). “Source localization in reverber-
ant rooms using deep learning and microphone arrays,” in Proceedings of
the ICA Conference, September 9–13, Aachen, Germany.
148 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Pujol, H., Bavu, E., and Garcia, A. ( 2021). “BeamLearning: An end-to-end
deep learning approach for the angular localization of sound sources using
raw multichannel acoustic pressure data,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 149(6),
4248–4263.
Purwins, H., Li, B., Virtanen, T., Schl €uter, J., Chang, S.-Y., and Sainath, T.
(2019). “Deep learning for audio signal processing,” IEEE J. Sel. Top.
Signal Process. 13(2), 206–219.
Raangs, R., and Druyvesteyn, E. ( 2002). “Sound source localization using
sound intensity measured by a three dimensional PU-probe,” in
Proceedings of AES Convention, May 10–13, Munich, Germany.
Rafaely, B. ( 2019). Fundamentals of Spherical Array Processing (Springer,
New York).
Ranjan, R., Jayabalan, S., Nguyen, T. N. T., and Lim, W.-S. ( 2019). “Sound
events detection and direction of arrival estimation using residual net and
recurrent neural networks,” in Proceedings of the Detection and
Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE
Workshop), October 25–26, New York.
Rastogi, R., Gupta, P., and Kumaresan, R. ( 1987). “Array signal processing
with interconnected neuron-like elements,” in Proceedings of the
ICASSP, April 6–9, Dallas, TX, pp. 2328–2331.
Rezende, D. J., Mohamed, S., and Wierstra, D. ( 2014). “Stochastic backpro-
pagation and approximate inference in deep generative models,” in
Proceedings of the ICML, June 21–26, Beijing, China.
Rho, D., Lee, S., Park, J., Kim, T., Chang, J., and Ko, J. ( 2021). “A combi-
nation of various neural networks for sound event localization and
detection,” Technical Report, DCASE 2021 Challenge.
Rickard, S. ( 2002). “On the approximate W-disjoint orthogonality of
speech,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , May 13–17, Orlando, FL, pp.
529–532.
Riezu, S. A. V., and Grande, E. F. ( 2021). “Room impulse response data-
set—ACT, DTU Elektro (011, IEC; plane, sphere),” https://data.dtu.dk/
articles/dataset/Room_Impulse_Response_Dataset_-_ACT_DTU_Elektro_
011_IEC_plane_sphere_/14320166(Last viewed June 27, 2022).
Rindel, J. H. ( 2000). “The use of computer modeling in room acoustics,”
J. Vibroeng. 3(4), 219–224.
Roden, R., Moritz, N., Gerlach, S., Weinzierl, S., and Goetze, S. ( 2015).
“On sound source localization of speech signals using deep neural
networks,” in Proceedings of Deutsche Jahrestagung Akustik (DAGA) ,
March 16–19, Nuremberg, Germany.
Roman, N., and Wang, D. ( 2008). “Binaural tracking of multiple moving
sources,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process. 16(4), 728–739.
Ronchini, F., Arteaga, D., and P /C19erez-L/C19opez, A. ( 2020). “Sound event locali-
zation and detection based on CRNN using rectangular ﬁlters and channel
rotation data augmentation,” in Proceedings of the Detection and
Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE
Workshop), November 2–4, Tokyo, Japan.
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., and Brox, T. ( 2015). “U-Net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proceedings of the
MICCAI, October 5–9, Munich, Germany, pp. 234–241.
R o s s i n g ,T .D .(2007). Springer Handbook of Acoustics(Springer, New York).
Roy, R., and Kailath, T. ( 1989). “ESPRIT: Estimation of signal parameters
via rotational invariance techniques,” IEEE Trans. Acoust, Speech, Signal
Process. 37(7), 984–995.
Ruder, S. ( 2017). “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05098.
Sadeghian, A., Alahi, A., and Savarese, S. ( 2017). “Tracking the untrack-
able: Learning to track multiple cues with long-term dependencies,” in
Proceedings of the ICCV, October 22–29, Venice, Italy, pp. 300–311.
Sadok, S., Leglaive, S., Girin, L., Alameda-Pineda, X., and S /C19eguier, R.
(2022). “Learning and controlling the source-ﬁlter representation of
speech with a variational autoencoder,” arXiv:2204.07075.
Sainath, T. N., Weiss, R. J., Wilson, K. W., Li, B., Narayanan, A., Variani,
E., Bacchiani, M., Shafran, I., Senior, A., Chin, K., Misra, A., and Kim,
C., ( 2017). “Multichannel signal processing with deep neural networks
for automatic speech recognition,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech.
Lang. Process. 25(5), 965–979.
Salamon, J., and Bello, J. P. ( 2017). “Deep convolutional neural networks
and data augmentation for environmental sound classiﬁcation,” IEEE
Signal Process. Lett. 24(3), 279–283.
Saleh, F., Aliakbarian, S., Rezatoﬁghi, H., Salzmann, M., and Gould, S.
(2021). “Probabilistic tracklet scoring and inpainting for multiple object
tracking,” in Proceedings of the CVPR , June 19–25, Nashville, TN (vir-
tual conference), pp. 14329–14339.
Salvati, D., Drioli, C., and Foresti, G. L. ( 2018). “Exploiting CNNs for
improving acoustic source localization in noisy and reverberant con-
ditions,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell. 2(2), 103–116.
Sampathkumar, A., and Kowerko, D. ( 2020). “Sound event detection and
localization using CRNN models,” Technical Report, DCASE 2020
Challenge.
Sato, I., Liu, G., Ishikawa, K., Suzuki, T., and Tanaka, M. ( 2021). “Does
end-to-end trained deep model always perform better than non-end-to-end
counterpart?,” Electron. Imag. 2021(10), 240–241.
Sawada, H., Mukai, R., and Makino, S. ( 2003). “Direction of arrival estima-
tion for multiple source signals using independent component analysis,”
in IEEE International Symposium on Signal Processing in Applications ,
July 1–4, Paris, France, pp. 411–414.
Scheibler, R., Bezzam, E., and Dokmani, I. ( 2018). “Pyroomacoustics: A
Python package for audio room simulation and array processing algo-
rithms,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , April 15–20, Calgary, Canada,
pp. 351–355.
Schmidt, R. ( 1986). “Multiple emitter location and signal parameter
estimation,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. 34(3), 276–280.
Schwartz, O., and Gannot, S. ( 2013). “Speaker tracking using recursive EM
algorithms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 22(2),
392–402.
Schymura, C., B €onninghoff, B., Ochiai, T., Delcroix, M., Kinoshita, K.,
Nakatani, T., Araki, S., and Kolossa, D. ( 2021). “PILOT: Introducing
Transformers for probabilistic sound event localization,” in Proceedings
of Interspeech, August 30–September 3, Brno, Czech Republic.
Schymura, C., Ochiai, T., Delcroix, M., Kinoshita, K., Nakatani, T., Araki,
S., and Kolossa, D. ( 2020). “Exploiting attention-based sequence-to-
sequence architectures for sound event localization,” in Proceedings of
the EUSIPCO, August 24–28, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Sehgal, A., and Kehtarnavaz, N. ( 2018). “A convolutional neural network
smartphone app for real-time voice activity detection,” IEEE Access 6,
9017–9026.
Shimada, K., Koyama, Y., Takahashi, N., Takahashi, S., and Mitsufuji, Y.
(2020a). “ACCDOA: Activity-coupled cartesian direction of arrival rep-
resentation for sound event localization and detection,” in Proceedings of
the ICASSP, May 4–8, Barcelona, Spain (virtual conference).
Shimada, K., Takahashi, N., Koyama, Y., Takahashi, S., Tsunoo, E.,
Takahashi, M., and Mitsufuji, Y. ( 2021). “Ensemble of ACCDOA- and
EINV2-based systems with d3nets and impulse response simulation for
sound event localization and detection,” Technical Report, DCASE 2021
Challenge.
Shimada, K., Takahashi, N., Takahashi, S., and Mitsufuji, Y. ( 2020b).
“Sound event localization and detection using activity-coupled cartesian
DoA vector and RD3net,” Technical Report, DCASE 2020 Challenge.
Shlezinger, N., Whang, J., Eldar, Y. C., and Dimakis, A. G. ( 2020).
“Model-based deep learning,” arXiv:2012.08405.
Siltanen, S., Lokki, T., and Savioja, L. ( 2010). “Rays or waves? understand-
ing the strengths and weaknesses of computational room acoustics model-
ing techniques,” in Proceedings of the ISRA , August 29–31, Melbourne,
Australia.
Singla, R., Tiwari, S., and Sharma, R. ( 2020). “A sequential system for
sound event detection and localization using CRNN,” Technical Report,
DCASE 2020 Challenge.
Sivasankaran, S., Vincent, E., and Fohr, D. ( 2018). “Keyword-based speaker
localization: Localizing a target speaker in a multi-speaker environment,”
in Proceedings of Interspeech, September 2–6, Hyderabad, India.
Song, J-m. ( 2020). “Localization and detection for moving sound sources
using consecutive ensembles of 2D-CRNN,” Technical Report, DCASE
2020 Challenge.
Southall, H., Simmers, J., and O’Donnell, T. ( 1995). “Direction ﬁnding in
phased arrays with a neural network beamformer,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propagat. 43(12), 1369–1374.
Stiefelhagen, R., Bernardin, K., Bowers, R., Rose, R. T., Michel, M., and
Garofolo, J. ( 2007). “The CLEAR 2007 evaluation,” in Proceedings of
the Multimodal Technologies for Perception of Humans , May 8–11,
Baltimore, MD, pp. 3–34.
Subramani, K., and Smaragdis, P. ( 2021). “Point cloud audio processing,”
in Proceedings of WASPAA, October 21–24, New Paltz, NY (virtual con-
ference), pp. 31–35.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 149
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Subramanian, A. S., Weng, C., Watanabe, S., Yu, M., Xu, Y., Zhang, S.-X.,
and Yu, D. ( 2021a). “Directional ASR: A new paradigm for E2E multi-
speaker speech recognition with source localization,” in Proceedings of
the ICASSP , June 6–11, Toronto, Canada (virtual conference), pp.
8433–8437.
Subramanian, A. S., Weng, C., Watanabe, S., Yu, M., and Yu, D. ( 2021b).
“Deep learning based multi-source localization with source splitting and
its effectiveness in multi-talker speech recognition,” arXiv:2102.07955.
Sudarsanam, P. A., Politis, A., and Drossos, K. ( 2021). “Assessment of self-
attention on learned features for sound event localization and detection,”
in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and
Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , November 15–19, Barcelona,
Spain, pp. 100–104.
Sudo, Y., Itoyama, K., Nishida, K., and Nakadai, K. ( 2019). “Improvement
of DOA estimation by using quaternion output in sound event localization
and detection,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of
Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , October
25–26, New York, NY.
Sun, P., Cao, J., Jiang, Y., Zhang, R., Xie, E., Yuan, Z., Wang, C., and Luo,
P. ( 2020). “Transtrack: Multiple object tracking with transformer,”
arXiv:2012.15460.
Sundar, H., Wang, W., Sun, M., and Wang, C. ( 2020). “Raw waveform
based end-to-end deep convolutional network for spatial localization of
multiple acoustic sources,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , May 4–8,
Barcelona, Spain (virtual conference), pp. 4642–4646.
Suvorov, D., Dong, G., and Zhukov, R. ( 2018). “Deep residual network for
sound source localization in the time domain,” arXiv:1808.06429.
Svensson, P., and Kristiansen, U. R. ( 2002). “Computational modelling and
simulation of acoustic spaces,” in Proceedings of the AES Conference ,
June 15–17, Espoo, Finland.
Sz€oke, I., Sk /C19acel, M., Moner, L., Paliesek, J., and /C20Cernock/C19y, J. ( 2019).
“Building and evaluation of a real room impulse response dataset,” IEEE
J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 13(4), 863–876.
Takahashi, N., Goswami, N., and Mitsufuji, Y. ( 2018). “MMDenseLSTM:
An efﬁcient combination of convolutional and recurrent neural networks
for audio source separation,” in Proceedings of the IWAENC , September
17–20, Tokyo, Japan.
Takahashi, N., Gygli, M., Pﬁster, B., and Gool, L. V. ( 2016). “Deep convo-
lutional neural networks and data augmentation for acoustic event recog-
nition,” in Proceedings of Interspeech , September 8–12, San Francisco,
CA, pp. 2982–2986.
Takeda, R., and Komatani, K. ( 2016a). “Discriminative multiple sound
source localization based on deep neural networks using independent loca-
tion model,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Spoken Language Technology
Workshop, December 13–16, San Juan, Portugal, pp. 603–609.
Takeda, R., and Komatani, K. ( 2016b). “Sound source localization based
on deep neural networks with directional activate function exploiting
phase information,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , March 20–25,
Shanghai, China, pp. 405–409.
Takeda, R., and Komatani, K. (2017). “Unsupervised adaptation of deep neural
networks for sound source localization using entropy minimization,” in
Proceedings of the ICASSP, March 5–9, New Orleans, LA, pp. 2217–2221.
Takeda, R., Kudo, Y., Takashima, K., Kitamura, Y., and Komatani, K.
(2018). “Unsupervised adaptation of neural networks for discriminative
sound source localization with eliminative constraint,” in Proceedings of
the ICASSP, April 15–20, Calgary, Canada, pp. 3514–3518.
Tang, Z., Kanu, J. D., Hogan, K., and Manocha, D. ( 2019). “Regression and
classiﬁcation for direction-of-arrival estimation with convolutional recur-
rent neural networks,” in Proceedings of Interspeech , September 15–19,
Graz, Austria, pp. 654–658.
Tervo, S. ( 2009). “Direction estimation based on sound intensity vectors,”
in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August 24–28, Glasgow, Scotland, pp.
700–704.
Thiemann, J., and Van De Par, S. ( 2015). “Multiple model high-spatial res-
olution HRTF measurements,” in Proceedings of Deutsche Jahrestagung
Akustik (DAGA), March 16–19, Nuremberg, Germany.
Thuillier, E., Gamper, H., and Tashev, I. J. ( 2018). “Spatial audio feature
discovery with convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the
ICASSP, April 15–20, Calgary, Canada, pp. 6797–6801.
Tian, C. ( 2020). “Multiple CRNN for SELD,” Technical Report, DCASE
2020 Challenge.
Tranter, S. E., and Reynolds, D. A. ( 2006). “An overview of automatic
speaker diarization systems,” IEEE Trans. Audio. Speech Lang. Process.
14(5), 1557–1565.
Tsuzuki, H., Kugler, M., Kuroyanagi, S., and Iwata, A. ( 2013). “An
approach for sound source localization by complex-valued neural
network,” IEICE Trans. Inform. Syst. 96(10), 2257–2265.
€Unleren, M. F., and Yaldiz, E. ( 2016). “Direction of arrival estimation by
using artiﬁcial neural networks,” in Proceedings of the European
Modelling Symposium, November 28–30, Pisa, Italy, pp. 242–245.
Vaidyanathan, P. P., and Pal, P. ( 2010). “Sparse sensing with co-prime sam-
plers and arrays,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 59(2), 573–586.
Valero, M. L., and Habets, E. A. ( 2017). “Multi-microphone acoustic echo
cancellation using relative echo transfer functions,” in Proceedings of
WASPAA, October 21–24, New Paltz, NY, pp. 229–233.
Van Veen, B. D., and Buckley, K. M. ( 1988). “Beamforming: A versatile
approach to spatial ﬁltering,” IEEE Acoust. Speech Signal Process. Mag.
5(2), 4–24.
Varanasi, V., Gupta, H., and Hegde, R. M. ( 2020). “A deep learning frame-
work for robust DoA estimation using spherical harmonic decom-
position,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 28,
1248–1259.
Vargas, E., Hopgood, J. R., Brown, K., and Subr, K. ( 2021). “On improved
training of CNN for acoustic source localisation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 29, 720–732.
Varzandeh, R., Adilolu, K., Doclo, S., and Hohmann, V. ( 2020).
“Exploiting periodicity features for joint detection and DoA estimation of
speech sources using convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of
the ICASSP , May 4–8, Barcelona, Spain (virtual conference), pp.
566–570.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.
N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. ( 2017). “Attention is all you need,”
arXiv:1706.03762.
Vecchiotti, P., Ma, N., Squartini, S., and Brown, G. J. ( 2019a). “End-to-end
binaural sound localisation from the raw waveform,” in Proceedings of
the ICASSP, May 12–17, Brighton, UK, pp. 451–455.
Vecchiotti, P., Pepe, G., Principi, E., and Squartini, S. ( 2019b). “Detection
of activity and position of speakers by using deep neural networks and
acoustic data augmentation,” Expert Syst. with Appl. 134, 53–65.
Vecchiotti, P., Principi, E., Squartini, S., and Piazza, F. ( 2018). “Deep neu-
ral networks for joint voice activity detection and speaker localization,”
in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , September 3–7, Roma, Italy, pp.
1567–1571.
Vera-Diaz, J. M., Pizarro, D., and Macias-Guarasa, J. ( 2018). “Towards
end-to-end acoustic localization using deep learning: From audio signal to
source position coordinates,” Sensors 18(10), 3418.
Vera-Diaz, J. M., Pizarro, D., and Macias-Guarasa, J. ( 2020). “Towards
domain independence in CNN-based acoustic localization using deep
cross correlations,” in Proceedings of the EUSIPCO , August 24–28,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands (virtual conference), pp. 226–230.
Vera-Diaz, J. M., Pizarro, D., and Macias-Guarasa, J. ( 2021). “Acoustic
source localization with deep generalized cross correlations,” Signal
Process. 187, 108169.
Vesperini, F., Vecchiotti, P., Principi, E., Squartini, S., and Piazza, F.
(2016). “A neural network based algorithm for speaker localization in a
multi-room environment,” in Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Machine Learning for Signal Processing , September 13–16, Salerno,
Italy, pp. 1–6.
Vincent, E., and Campbell, D. R. ( 2008). “Roomsimove,” GNU Public
License, http://homepages.loria.fr/evincent/software/Roomsimove\_1.
Vincent, E., Virtanen, T., and Gannot, S. ( 2018). Audio Source Separation
and Speech Enhancement (John Wiley & Sons, New York).
Vo, B.-N., Mallick, M., Bar-shalom, Y., Coraluppi, S., Osborne, R.,
Mahler, R., and Vo, B-T. ( 2015). “Multitarget tracking,” in Wiley
Encyclopaedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering (Wiley, New
York).
Wabnitz, A., Epain, N., Jin, C., and Van Schaik, A. ( 2010). “Room acous-
tics simulation for multichannel microphone arrays,” in Proceedings of
the ISRA, August 29–31, Melbourne, Australia, pp. 1–6.
Waibel, A., Hanazawa, T., Hinton, G., Shikano, K., and Lang, K. ( 1989).
“Phoneme recognition using time-delay neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
Acoust, Speech, Signal Process. 37(3), 328–339.
150 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al.
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf


Wang, D., and Chen, J. ( 2018). “Supervised speech separation based on
deep learning: An overview,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang.
Process. 26(10), 1702–1726.
Wang, L., Liu, Y., Zhao, L., Wang, Q., Zeng, X., and Chen, K. ( 2018).
“Acoustic source localization in strong reverberant environment by
parametric Bayesian dictionary learning,” Signal Process. 143, 232–240.
Wang, Q., Du, J., Wu, H.-X., Pan, J., Ma, F., and Lee, C.-H. ( 2021). “A
four-stage data augmentation approach to ResNet-Conformer based
acoustic modeling for sound event localization and detection,”
arXiv:2101.02919.
Wang, Q., Wu, H., Jing, Z., Ma, F., Fang, Y., Wang, Y., Chen, T., Pan, J.,
Du, J., and Lee, C.-H. ( 2020). “The USTC-IFLYTEK system for sound
event localization and detection of DCASE 2020 challenge,” Technical
Report, DCASE 2020 Challenge.
Wang, Z., Zhang, X., and Wang, D. ( 2019). “Robust speaker localization
guided by deep learning-based time-frequency masking,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 27(1), 178–188.
Wichern, G., Antognini, J., Flynn, M., Zhu, L. R., McQuinn, E., Crow, D.,
Manilow, E., and Roux, J. L. ( 2019). “Wham!: Extending speech separa-
tion to noisy environments,” in Proceedings of Interspeech , September
15–19, Graz, Austria.
Woodruff, J., and Wang, D. ( 2012). “Binaural localization of multiple sour-
ces in reverberant and noisy environments,” IEEE Trans. Audio. Speech.
Lang. Process. 20(5), 1503–1512.
Wu, X., Wu, Z., Ju, L., and Wang, S. ( 2021c). “Binaural audio-visual local-
ization,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, February 2–9, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 2961–2968.
Wu, Y., Ayyalasomayajula, R., Bianco, M. J., Bharadia, D., and
G e r s t o f t ,P .(2021a). “Sound source localization based on multi-task
learning and image translation network,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 150(5),
3374–3386.
Wu, Y., Ayyalasomayajula, R., Bianco, M. J., Bharadia, D., and Gerstoft, P.
(2021b). “SSLIDE: Sound source localization for indoors based on deep
learning,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , June 6–11, Toronto, Canada
(virtual conference).
Xenaki, A., B €unsow Boldt, J., and Græsbøll Christensen, M. ( 2018).
“Sound source localization and speech enhancement with sparse
Bayesian learning beamforming,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 143(6),
3912–3921.
Xenaki, A., and Gerstoft, P. ( 2015). “Grid-free compressive beamforming,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 137(4), 1923–1935.
Xenaki, A., Gerstoft, P., and Mosegaard, K. ( 2014). “Compressive
beamforming,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 136(1), 260–271.
Xiang, J., Zhang, G., and Hou, J. ( 2019). “Online multi-object tracking
based on feature representation and Bayesian ﬁltering within a deep learn-
ing architecture,” IEEE Access 7, 27923–27935.
Xiao, X., Zhao, S., Zhong, X., Jones, D. L., Chng, E. S., and Li, H. ( 2015).
“A learning-based approach to direction of arrival estimation in noisy and
reverberant environments,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP , April 19–24,
Brisbane, Australia, pp. 2814–2818.
Xinghao, S., Hu, Y., Zhu, X., and He, L. ( 2021). “Sound event localization
and detection based on adaptive hybrid convolution and multi-scale fea-
ture extractor,” in Proceedings of the Detection and Classiﬁcation of
Acoustic Scenes and Events Workshop (DCASE Workshop) , November
15–19, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 130–134.
Xu, B., Sun, G., Yu, R., and Yang, Z. ( 2013). “High-accuracy TDOA-based
localization without time synchronization,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst. 24(8), 1567–1576.
Xu, P., Arcondoulis, E. J. G., and Liu, Y. ( 2021a). “Acoustic source imag-
ing using densely connected convolutional networks,” Mech. Syst. Signal
Process. 151, 107370.
Xu, Y., Ban, Y., Delorme, G., Gan, C., Rus, D., and Alameda-Pineda, X.
(2021b). “Transcenter: Transformers with dense queries for multiple-
object tracking,” arXiv:2103.15145.
Xue, W., Tong, Y., Zhang, C., Ding, G., He, X., and Zhou, B. ( 2020).
“Sound event localization and detection based on multiple DoA beam-
forming and multi-task learning,” in Proceedings of the ICSP, September
12–15, Shanghai, China (virtual conference).
Xue, W., Ying, T., Chao, Z., and Guohong, D. ( 2019). “Multi-beam and
multi-task learning for joint sound event detection and localization,”
Technical Report, DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Yalta, N., Nakadai, K., and Ogata, T. ( 2017). “Sound source localization
using deep learning models,” J. Robot. Mechatron. 29(1), 37–48.
Yalta, N., Sumiyoshi, Y., and Kawaguchi, Y. ( 2021). “The Hitachi DCASE
2021 Task 3 system: Handling directive interference with self attention
layers,” Technical Report, DCASE 2021 Challenge.
Yang, W.-H., Chan, K.-K., and Chang, P.-R. ( 1994). “Complex-valued neu-
ral network for direction of arrival estimation,” Electron. Lett. 30(7),
574–575.
Yang, B., Li, X., and Liu, H. ( 2021a). “Supervised direct-path relative
transfer function learning for binaural sound source localization,” in
Proceedings of the ICASSP , June 6–11, Toronto, Canada (virtual confer-
ence), pp. 825–829.
Yang, B., Liu, H., and Li, X. ( 2021b). “Learning deep direct-path relative
transfer function for binaural sound source localization,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Audio. Speech. Lang. Process. 29, 3491–3503.
Yang, Z., Li, J., Stoica, P., and Xie, L. ( 2018). “Sparse methods for direc-
tion-of-arrival estimation,” Academic Press Library Signal Process. 7,
509–581.
Yang, Z., and Xie, L. ( 2015). “Enhancing sparsity and resolution via
reweighted atomic norm minimization,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.
64(4), 995–1006.
Yasuda, M., Koizumi, Y., Saito, S., Uematsu, H., and Imoto, K. ( 2020).
“Sound event localization based on sound intensity vector reﬁned by
DNN-based denoising and source separation,” in Proceedings of the
ICASSP, May 4–8, Barcelona, Spain (virtual conference), pp. 651–655.
Yiwere, M., and Rhee, E. J. ( 2017). “Distance estimation and localization
of sound sources in reverberant conditions using deep neural networks,”
Int. J. Eng. Res. Appl. 12(22), 12384–12389.
Youssef, K., Argentieri, S., and Zarader, J. ( 2013). “A learning-based
approach to robust binaural sound localization,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/RSJ IROS, November 3–7, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 2927–2932.
Yu, D., Kolbæk, M., Tan, Z.-H., and Jensen, J. ( 2017). “Permutation invari-
ant training of deep models for speaker-independent multi-talker speech
separation,” in Proceedings of the ICASSP, March 5–9, New Orleans, LA,
pp. 241–245.
Zea, E., and Laudato, M. ( 2021). “On the representation of wavefronts
localized in space-time and wavenumber-frequency domains,” JASA
Express Lett. 1(5), 054801.
Zermini, A., Yu, Y., Xu, Y., Wang, W., and Plumbley, M. D. ( 2016). “Deep
neural network based audio source separation,” in Proceedings of the
IMA, May 18–20, Birmingham, UK.
Zhang, H., Cisse, M., Dauphin, Y. N., and Lopez-Paz, D. ( 2018). “Mixup:
Beyond empirical risk minimization,” arXiv:1710.09412.
Zhang, J., Ding, W., and He, L. ( 2019a). “Data augmentation and priori
knowledge-based regularization for sound event localization and
detection,” Technical Report, DCASE 2019 Challenge.
Zhang, Y., Wang, S., Li, Z., Guo, K., Chen, S., and Pang, Y. ( 2021). “Data
augmentation and class-based ensembled CNN-Conformer networks for
sound event localization and detection,” Technical Report, DCASE 2021
Challenge.
Zhang, Y., and Yang, Q. ( 2021). “A survey on multi-task learning,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. (published online).
Zhang, Y., Ye, Z., Xu, X., and Hu, N. ( 2014). “Off-grid DOA estimation
using array covariance matrix and block-sparse Bayesian learning,”
Signal Process. 98, 197–201.
Zhang, W., Zhou, Y., and Qian, Y. ( 2019b). “Robust DoA estimation based
on convolutional neural network and time-frequency masking,” in
Proceedings of Interspeech , September 15–19, Graz, Austria, pp.
2703–2707.
Zhuang, F., Qi, Z., Duan, K., Xi, D., Zhu, Y., Zhu, H., Xiong, H., and He,
Q. ( 2020). “A comprehensive survey on transfer learning,” Proc. IEEE
109(1), 43–76.
Zotter, F., and Frank, M. ( 2019). “Ambisonics: A practical 3D audio theory
for recording ,” in Studio Production, Sound Reinforcement, and Virtual
Reality (Springer Nature, New York).
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 152 (1), July 2022 Grumiaux et al. 151
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0011809
Downloaded from http://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/152/1/107/16525693/107_1_online.pdf
